1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 1999 Dec;92(5):343-8.

[Present status of an arbovirus infection: yellow fever, its natural history of 
hemorrhagic fever, Rift Valley fever].

[Article in French]

Digoutte JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Dakar, Sénégal.

In the early 20th century, when it was discovered that the yellow fever virus 
was transmitted in its urban cycle by Aedes aegypti, measures of control were 
introduced leading to its disappearance. Progressive neglect of the disease, 
however, led to a new outbreak in 1927 during which the etiological agent was 
isolated; some years later a vaccine was discovered and yellow fever disappeared 
again. In the 1960s, rare cases of encephalitis were observed in young children 
after vaccination and the administration of the vaccine was forbidden for 
children under 10 years. Five years later, a new outbreak of yellow fever in 
Diourbel, Senegal, was linked to the presence of Aedes aegypti. In the late 
1970s, the idea of a selvatic cycle for yellow fever arose. Thanks to new 
investigative techniques in Senegal and Côte d'Ivoire, the yellow fever virus 
was isolated from the reservoir of virus and vectors. The isolated virus was 
identified in monkeys and several vectors: Aedes furcifer, Aedes taylori, Aedes 
luteocephalus. Most importantly, the virus was isolated in male mosquitoes. 
Until recently, the only known cycle had been that of Haddow in East Africa. The 
virus circulate in the canopea between monkeys and Aedes africanus. These 
monkeys infect Aedes bromeliae when they come to eat in banana plantations. This 
cycle does not occur in West Africa. Vertical transmission is the main method of 
maintenance of the virus through the dry season. "Reservoirs of virus" are often 
mentioned in medical literature, monkeys having a short viremia whereas 
mosquitoes remain infected throughout their life cycle. In such a selvatic 
cycle, circulation can reach very high levels and no child would be able to 
escape an infecting bite and yet no clinical cases of yellow fever have been 
reported. The virulence--as it affects man--of the yellow fever virus in its 
wild cycle is very low. In areas where the virus can circulate in epidemic form, 
two types of circulation can be distinguished. Intermediate yellow fever--a term 
coined to define epidemia which do not correspond exactly to urban yellow fever. 
The cycle involves men and monkeys through wild vectors as Aedes furcifer but 
also through Aedes aegypti and the mortality rate is much lower than for urban 
epidemics. In urban yellow fever, man is the only vertebrate host involved in 
the circulation of the virus, the vector being generally Aedes aegypti. This 
vector maintains a selective pressure, increasing the transmission of virus 
capable of producing high viremia in man. In the selvatic cycles, two cycles can 
be distinguished: one of maintenance which does not increase the quantity of 
virus in circulation and one of amplification which does increase this quantity. 
As we shall see, it develops into an epizootic form but also in an epidemic form 
in man. When the decrease in yellow fevers across Africa is considered, it 
appears that all major epidemics occur in West Africa inspite of the presence of 
wild cycles of the yellow fever virus in Central and East Africa. For the rare 
epidemics that have occurred there, the vector has never been Aedes aegypti. In 
a recent outbreak in Kenya, the vector was Aedes bromeliae. The examination of 
part of the gene encoding for envelope protein showed the presence of two 
geographical types corresponding to West-Africa and Central East-Africa. 
Clinically speaking, yellow fever is an haemorrhagic fever with hepatitis 
similar to other haemorrhagic fevers such as Rift Valley fever. When, in 1987, 
an outbreak of haemorrhagic fever occurred in southern Mauritania, for several 
days it was thought to be yellow fever. Four days later, the diagnosis was 
corrected by isolating and identifying the virus as that of Rift Valley fever 
(RVFV). RVFV causes several pathogenic syndromes in human beings: acute febrile 
illness, haemorrhagic fever, haemorrhagic fever with hepatitis, nervous 
syndromes or ocular disease. Mortality rate was high for haemorrhagic fever with 
hepatitis, reaching 36%. (ABST

PMID: 10690474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]