1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e41707. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041707. Epub 2012 Sep
19.

A flow cytometry-based assay for quantifying non-plaque forming strains of 
yellow fever virus.

Hammarlund E(1), Amanna IJ, Dubois ME, Barron A, Engelmann F, Messaoudi I, 
Slifka MK.

Author information:
(1)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Beaverton, Oregon, United States of America.

Primary clinical isolates of yellow fever virus can be difficult to quantitate 
by standard in vitro methods because they may not form discernable plaques or 
induce a measurable cytopathic effect (CPE) on cell monolayers. In our hands, 
the Dakar strain of yellow fever virus (YFV-Dakar) could not be measured by 
plaque assay (PA), focus-forming assay (FFA), or by measurement of CPE. For 
these reasons, we developed a YFV-specific monoclonal antibody (3A8.B6) and used 
it to optimize a highly sensitive flow cytometry-based tissue culture limiting 
dilution assay (TC-LDA) to measure levels of infectious virus. The TC-LDA was 
performed by incubating serial dilutions of virus in replicate wells of C6/36 
cells and stained intracellularly for virus with MAb 3A8.B6. Using this 
approach, we could reproducibly quantitate YFV-Dakar in tissue culture 
supernatants as well as from the serum of viremic rhesus macaques experimentally 
infected with YFV-Dakar. Moreover, the TC-LDA approach was >10-fold more 
sensitive than standard plaque assay for quantitating typical plaque-forming 
strains of YFV including YFV-17D and YFV-FNV (French neurotropic vaccine). 
Together, these results indicate that the TC-LDA technique is effective for 
quantitating both plaque-forming and non-plaque-forming strains of yellow fever 
virus, and this methodology may be readily adapted for the study and 
quantitation of other non-plaque-forming viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041707
PMCID: PMC3446955
PMID: 23028428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: OHSU, MKS, IJA, and EH 
declare a financial interest based on shares in Najít Technologies, Inc., a 
company that may have a commercial interest in the results of this research and 
technology. MKS is President and Chief Scientific Officer at Najít Technologies, 
Inc., and IJA is Associate Vice President at Najít Technologies, Inc. These 
potential individual and institutional conflicts of interest have been reviewed 
and managed by OHSU and the Integrity Program Oversight Council. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all of the PLOS ONE policies pertaining to 
sharing data and materials. IM, FE, MED, and AB declare no competing financial 
interests.