1. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Nov;32(11):1667-70.

[Screening and identification of dengue virus type 2-specific antigens].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren R(1), Tang B, Zhang P, Hu W, Hong W, Liu J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Guangzhou Military District, 
Guangzhou, China. renruiwen@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To screen and identify dengue virus type 2 specific antigens and 
establish an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for detecting dengue 
virus type 2 antibody.
METHODS: Using the bioinformatic software DNAstar and ANTHEPROT, we analyzed the 
hydrophilicity, flexibility, surface probability and antigenicity of dengue 
virus type 1-4, Japanese encephalitis virus, and Yellow fever virus M and E 
protein amino acid sequences, and also evaluated the influence of secondary 
structure. The specific epitopes of dengue virus type 2 were predicted according 
to the epitope location and amino acid sequence similarity, and the epitope 
conservation was assessed using the sequence information of different dengue 
virus type 2 strains in GenBank. Based on the results of bioinformatic analysis, 
5 specific epitopes were amplified and inserted into the prokaryotic expression 
vector pET32a, which were transferred into E. coli Rosetta (DE3) for expression 
of the proteins. SDS-PAGE and Western blotting were used to identify the 
expressed proteins and test their antigenicities. The antigen selected by 
Western blotting was used to establish the ELISA system for dengue virus type 2 
antibody detection.
RESULTS: Bioinformatic analysis predicted 8 possible dengue virus type 2 
specific epitopes, and 6 of them were efficiently expressed in E. coli. Western 
blotting confirmed 1 dengue virus type 2 specific antigen, the ELISA system for 
dengue virus antibody detection was successfully established using this specific 
antigen.
CONCLUSION: We have obtained a dengue virus type 2 specific antigen and 
established an ELISA system for detection of dengue virus type 2 antibody.

PMID: 23174601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]