1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(6):e1003458. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003458. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

Dissection of antibody specificities induced by yellow fever vaccination.

Vratskikh O(1), Stiasny K, Zlatkovic J, Tsouchnikas G, Jarmer J, Karrer U, 
Roggendorf M, Roggendorf H, Allwinn R, Heinz FX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The live attenuated yellow fever (YF) vaccine has an excellent record of 
efficacy and one dose provides long-lasting immunity, which in many cases may 
last a lifetime. Vaccination stimulates strong innate and adaptive immune 
responses, and neutralizing antibodies are considered to be the major effectors 
that correlate with protection from disease. Similar to other flaviviruses, such 
antibodies are primarily induced by the viral envelope protein E, which consists 
of three distinct domains (DI, II, and III) and is presented at the surface of 
mature flavivirions in an icosahedral arrangement. In general, the dominance and 
individual variation of antibodies to different domains of viral surface 
proteins and their impact on neutralizing activity are aspects of humoral 
immunity that are not well understood. To gain insight into these phenomena, we 
established a platform of immunoassays using recombinant proteins and protein 
domains that allowed us to dissect and quantify fine specificities of the 
polyclonal antibody response after YF vaccination in a panel of 51 vaccinees as 
well as determine their contribution to virus neutralization by serum depletion 
analyses. Our data revealed a high degree of individual variation in antibody 
specificities present in post-vaccination sera and differences in the 
contribution of different antibody subsets to virus neutralization. Irrespective 
of individual variation, a substantial proportion of neutralizing activity 
appeared to be due to antibodies directed to complex quaternary epitopes 
displayed on the virion surface only but not on monomeric E. On the other hand, 
DIII-specific antibodies (presumed to have the highest neutralizing activity) as 
well as broadly flavivirus cross-reactive antibodies were absent or present at 
very low titers. These data provide new information on the fine specificity as 
well as variability of antibody responses after YF vaccination that are 
consistent with a strong influence of individual-specific factors on 
immunodominance in humoral immune responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003458
PMCID: PMC3688551
PMID: 23818856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.