1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Feb;133(2):439-47. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.10.037.  Epub 2013 Dec 10.

Transcutaneous yellow fever vaccination of subjects with or without atopic 
dermatitis.

Slifka MK(1), Leung DY(2), Hammarlund E(3), Raué HP(3), Simpson EL(4), Tofte 
S(4), Baig-Lewis S(4), David G(5), Lynn H(5), Woolson R(5), Hata T(6), Milgrom 
H(2), Hanifin J(4).

Author information:
(1)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Beaverton, Ore. Electronic address: slifkam@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo.
(3)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Beaverton, Ore.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Ore.
(5)Rho, Inc, Chapel Hill, NC.
(6)Division of Dermatology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, Calif.

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common inflammatory skin disease with a 
global prevalence ranging from 3% to 20%. Patients with AD have an increased 
risk for complications after viral infection (eg, herpes simplex virus), and 
vaccination of patients with AD with live vaccinia virus is contraindicated 
because of a heightened risk of eczema vaccinatum, a rare but potentially lethal 
complication associated with smallpox vaccination.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to develop a better understanding of immunity to cutaneous 
viral infection in patients with AD.
METHODS: In a double-blind randomized study we investigated the safety and 
immunogenicity of live attenuated yellow fever virus (YFV) vaccination of 
nonatopic subjects and patients with AD after standard subcutaneous inoculation 
or transcutaneous vaccination administered with a bifurcated needle. Viremia, 
neutralizing antibody, and antiviral T-cell responses were analyzed for up to 30 
days after vaccination.
RESULTS: YFV vaccination administered through either route was well tolerated. 
Subcutaneous vaccination resulted in higher seroconversion rates than 
transcutaneous vaccination but elicited similar antiviral antibody levels and 
T-cell responses in both the nonatopic and AD groups. After transcutaneous 
vaccination, both groups mounted similar neutralizing antibody responses, but 
patients with AD demonstrated lower antiviral T-cell responses by 30 days after 
vaccination. Among transcutaneously vaccinated subjects, a significant inverse 
correlation between baseline IgE levels and the magnitude of antiviral antibody 
and CD4(+) T-cell responses was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: YFV vaccination of patients with AD through the transcutaneous 
route revealed that high baseline IgE levels provide a potential biomarker for 
predicting reduced virus-specific immune memory after transcutaneous infection 
with a live virus.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2013.10.037
PMCID: PMC3960337
PMID: 24331381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]