1. BMC Infect Dis. 2014 May 9;14:246. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-246.

Distinguishing West Nile virus infection using a recombinant envelope protein 
with mutations in the conserved fusion-loop.

Chabierski S, Barzon L, Papa A, Niedrig M, Bramson JL, Richner JM, Palù G, 
Diamond MS, Ulbert S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and 
Immunology, Perlickstrasse 1, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. 
sebastian.ulbert@izi.fraunhofer.de.

BACKGROUND: West Nile Virus (WNV) is an emerging mosquito-transmitted flavivirus 
that continues to spread and cause disease throughout several parts of the 
world, including Europe and the Americas. Specific diagnosis of WNV infections 
using current serological testing is complicated by the high degree of 
cross-reactivity between antibodies against other clinically relevant 
flaviviruses, including dengue, tick-borne encephalitis (TBEV), Japanese 
encephalitis (JEV), and yellow fever (YFV) viruses. Cross-reactivity is 
particularly problematic in areas where different flaviviruses co-circulate or 
in populations that have been immunized with vaccines against TBEV, JEV, or YFV. 
The majority of cross-reactive antibodies against the immunodominant flavivirus 
envelope (E) protein target a conserved epitope in the fusion loop at the distal 
end of domain II.
METHODS: We tested a loss-of-function bacterially expressed recombinant WNV E 
protein containing mutations in the fusion loop and an adjacent loop domain as a 
possible diagnostic reagent. By comparing the binding of sera from humans 
infected with WNV or other flaviviruses to the wild type and the mutant E 
proteins, we analyzed the potential of this technology to specifically detect 
WNV antibodies.
RESULTS: Using this system, we could reliably determine WNV infections. 
Antibodies from WNV-infected individuals bound equally well to the wild type and 
the mutant protein. In contrast, sera from persons infected with other 
flaviviruses showed significantly decreased binding to the mutant protein. By 
calculating the mean differences between antibody signals detected using the 
wild type and the mutant proteins, a value could be assigned for each of the 
flaviviruses, which distinguished their pattern of reactivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Recombinant mutant E proteins can be used to discriminate 
infections with WNV from those with other flaviviruses. The data have important 
implications for the development of improved, specific serological assays for 
the detection of WNV antibodies in regions where other flaviviruses co-circulate 
or in populations that are immunized with other flavivirus vaccines.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-246
PMCID: PMC4028281
PMID: 24884467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]