1. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jul;124(7):3147-58. doi: 10.1172/JCI75429. Epub 2014 Jun
9.

Immune activation alters cellular and humoral responses to yellow fever 17D 
vaccine.

Muyanja E, Ssemaganda A, Ngauv P, Cubas R, Perrin H, Srinivasan D, Canderan G, 
Lawson B, Kopycinski J, Graham AS, Rowe DK, Smith MJ, Isern S, Michael S, 
Silvestri G, Vanderford TH, Castro E, Pantaleo G, Singer J, Gillmour J, Kiwanuka 
N, Nanvubya A, Schmidt C, Birungi J, Cox J, Haddad EK, Kaleebu P, Fast P, Sekaly 
RP, Trautmann L, Gaucher D.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2014 Oct 1;124(10):4669. Gaucher, Denis [Added].

BACKGROUND: Defining the parameters that modulate vaccine responses in African 
populations will be imperative to design effective vaccines for protection 
against HIV, malaria, tuberculosis, and dengue virus infections. This study 
aimed to evaluate the contribution of the patient-specific immune 
microenvironment to the response to the licensed yellow fever vaccine 17D 
(YF-17D) in an African cohort.
METHODS: We compared responses to YF-17D in 50 volunteers in Entebbe, Uganda, 
and 50 volunteers in Lausanne, Switzerland. We measured the CD8+ T cell and B 
cell responses induced by YF-17D and correlated them with immune parameters 
analyzed by flow cytometry prior to vaccination.
RESULTS: We showed that YF-17D-induced CD8+ T cell and B cell responses were 
substantially lower in immunized individuals from Entebbe compared with 
immunized individuals from Lausanne. The impaired vaccine response in the 
Entebbe cohort associated with reduced YF-17D replication. Prior to vaccination, 
we observed higher frequencies of exhausted and activated NK cells, 
differentiated T and B cell subsets and proinflammatory monocytes, suggesting an 
activated immune microenvironment in the Entebbe volunteers. Interestingly, 
activation of CD8+ T cells and B cells as well as proinflammatory monocytes at 
baseline negatively correlated with YF-17D-neutralizing antibody titers after 
vaccination. Additionally, memory T and B cell responses in preimmunized 
volunteers exhibited reduced persistence in the Entebbe cohort but were boosted 
by a second vaccination.
CONCLUSION: Together, these results demonstrate that an activated immune 
microenvironment prior to vaccination impedes efficacy of the YF-17D vaccine in 
an African cohort and suggest that vaccine regimens may need to be boosted in 
African populations to achieve efficient immunity.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registration is not required for observational studies.
FUNDING: This study was funded by Canada's Global Health Research Initiative, 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and United States Agency for 
International Development.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI75429
PMCID: PMC4071376
PMID: 24911151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]