1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Apr 13;9(4):e0003693. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0003693. eCollection 2015 Apr.

A DNA vaccine against yellow fever virus: development and evaluation.

Maciel M Jr(1), Cruz Fda S(2), Cordeiro MT(3), da Motta MA(4), Cassemiro KM(2), 
Maia Rde C(5), de Figueiredo RC(2), Galler R(4), Freire Mda S(4), August JT(1), 
Marques ET(6), Dhalia R(2).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology & 
Molecular Sciences, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Aggeu Magalhães Research Centre, 
Department of Virology, Laboratório de Virologia e Terapia Experimental 
(LAVITE), Universidade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE), University City, Recife, 
Pernambuco, Brazil.
(3)Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Aggeu Magalhães Research Centre, 
Department of Virology, Laboratório de Virologia e Terapia Experimental 
(LAVITE), Universidade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE), University City, Recife, 
Pernambuco, Brazil; Health Secretariat of the State of Pernambuco, Central 
Public Health Laboratory-LACEN, Boa Vista, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.
(4)Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Bio-Manguinhos, 
Laboratório de Tecnologia Virológica (LATEV), Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(5)Federal Rural University of Pernambuco, Department of Veterinary Medicine, 
Dois Irmãos, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.
(6)Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology & 
Molecular Sciences, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America; Oswaldo Cruz 
Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Aggeu Magalhães Research Centre, Department of Virology, 
Laboratório de Virologia e Terapia Experimental (LAVITE), Universidade Federal 
de Pernambuco (UFPE), University City, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil; University of 
Pittsburgh, Center for Vaccine Research, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States 
of America.

Attenuated yellow fever (YF) virus 17D/17DD vaccines are the only available 
protection from YF infection, which remains a significant source of morbidity 
and mortality in the tropical areas of the world. The attenuated YF virus 
vaccine, which is used worldwide, generates both long-lasting neutralizing 
antibodies and strong T-cell responses. However, on rare occasions, this vaccine 
has toxic side effects that can be fatal. This study presents the design of two 
non-viral DNA-based antigen formulations and the characterization of their 
expression and immunological properties. The two antigen formulations consist of 
DNA encoding the full-length envelope protein (p/YFE) or the full-length 
envelope protein fused to the lysosomal-associated membrane protein signal, 
LAMP-1 (pL/YFE), aimed at diverting antigen processing/presentation through the 
major histocompatibility complex II precursor compartments. The immune responses 
triggered by these formulations were evaluated in H2b and H2d backgrounds, 
corresponding to the C57Bl/6 and BALB/c mice strains, respectively. Both DNA 
constructs were able to induce very strong T-cell responses of similar magnitude 
against almost all epitopes that are also generated by the YF 17DD vaccine. The 
pL/YFE formulation performed best overall. In addition to the T-cell response, 
it was also able to stimulate high titers of anti-YF neutralizing antibodies 
comparable to the levels elicited by the 17DD vaccine. More importantly, the 
pL/YFE vaccine conferred 100% protection against the YF virus in intracerebrally 
challenged mice. These results indicate that pL/YFE DNA is an excellent vaccine 
candidate and should be considered for further developmental studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003693
PMCID: PMC4395287
PMID: 25875109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.