1. mBio. 2018 Oct 30;9(5):e01871-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01871-18.

Structural and Nonstructural Genes Contribute to the Genetic Diversity of RNA 
Viruses.

Collins ND(1), Beck AS(2), Widen SG(3), Wood TG(3), Higgs S(4)(5), Barrett 
ADT(6)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(3)Molecular Genomics Core Facility, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA.
(5)Biosecurity Research Institute, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, 
USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA abarrett@utmb.edu.
(7)Sealy Institute for Vaccine Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.

One paradigm to explain the complexity of viral RNA populations is that the low 
fidelity of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) drives high mutation rates 
and consequently genetic diversity. Like most RNA viruses, wild-type yellow 
fever virus (YFV) replication is error-prone due to the lack of proofreading by 
the virus-encoded RdRp. However, there is evidence that replication of the live 
attenuated YF vaccine virus 17D, derived from wild-type strain Asibi, is less 
error-prone than wild-type RNA viruses. Recent studies comparing the genetic 
diversity of wild-type Asibi and 17D vaccine virus found that wild-type Asibi 
has the typical heterogeneous population of an RNA virus, while there is limited 
intra- and interpopulation variability of 17D vaccine virus. Utilizing chimeric 
and mutant infectious clone-derived viruses, we show that high and low genetic 
diversity profiles of wild-type Asibi virus and vaccine virus 17D, respectively, 
are multigenic. Introduction of either structural (pre-membrane and envelope) 
genes or NS2B or NS4B substitutions into the Asibi and 17D backbone resulted in 
altered variant population, nucleotide diversity, and mutation frequency 
compared to the parental viruses. Additionally, changes in genetic diversity of 
the chimeric and mutant viruses correlated with the phenotype of multiplication 
kinetics in human alveolar A549 cells. Overall, the paradigm that only the 
error-prone RdRp controls genetic diversity needs to be expanded to address the 
role of other genes in genetic diversity, and we hypothesize that it is the 
replication complex as a whole and not the RdRp alone that controls genetic 
diversity.IMPORTANCE With the advent of advanced sequencing technology, studies 
of RNA viruses have shown that genetic diversity can contribute to both 
attenuation and virulence and the paradigm is that this is controlled by the 
error-prone RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). Since wild-type yellow fever 
virus (YFV) strain Asibi has genetic diversity typical of a wild-type RNA virus, 
while 17D virus vaccine has limited diversity, it provides a unique opportunity 
to investigate RNA population theory in the context of a well-characterized live 
attenuated vaccine. Utilizing infectious clone-derived viruses, we show that 
genetic diversity of RNA viruses is complex and that multiple genes, including 
structural genes and NS2B and NS4B genes also contribute to genetic diversity. 
We suggest that the replication complex as a whole, rather than only RdRp, 
drives genetic diversity, at least for YFV.

Copyright © 2018 Collins et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01871-18
PMCID: PMC6212827
PMID: 30377281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]