1. mBio. 2019 Sep 17;10(5):e01485-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01485-19.

Role of Zika Virus Envelope Protein Domain III as a Target of Human Neutralizing 
Antibodies.

Gallichotte EN(1), Young EF(2), Baric TJ(2), Yount BL(2), Metz SW(3), Begley 
MC(2), de Silva AM(3), Baric RS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
School of Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA egallich@email.unc.edu 
rbaric@email.unc.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
School of Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is a flavivirus that is structurally highly similar to the 
related viruses, dengue virus (DENV), West Nile virus, and yellow fever virus. 
ZIKV causes an acute infection that often results in mild symptoms but that can 
cause severe disease in rare instances. Following infection, individuals mount 
an adaptive immune response, composed of antibodies (Abs) that target the 
envelope (E) glycoprotein of ZIKV, which covers the surface of the virus. Groups 
have studied monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal immune sera isolated from 
individuals who recovered from natural ZIKV infections. Some of these antibodies 
bind to domain III of E (EDIII), but the functional importance of these 
antibodies is unknown. In this study, we aimed to determine if EDIII is a major 
target of the potent serum neutralizing antibodies present in people after ZIKV 
infection. By generating a chimeric virus containing ZIKV EDIII in a DENV4 virus 
backbone, our data show a minor role of EDIII-targeting antibodies in human 
polyclonal neutralization. These results reveal that while monoclonal antibody 
(MAb) studies are informative in identifying individual antibody epitopes, they 
can overestimate the importance of epitopes contained within EDIII as targets of 
serum neutralizing antibodies. Additionally, these results argue that the major 
target of human ZIKV neutralizing antibodies resides elsewhere in E; however, 
further studies are needed to assess the epitope specificity of the neutralizing 
response at the population level. Identification of the major epitopes on the 
envelope of ZIKV recognized by serum neutralizing antibodies is critical for 
understanding protective immunity following natural infection and for guiding 
the design and evaluation of vaccines.IMPORTANCE Zika virus is a flavivirus that 
was recently introduced to Latin America, where it caused a massive epidemic. 
Individuals infected with ZIKV generate an immune response composed of 
antibodies which bind to the envelope (E) protein. These anti-E antibodies are 
critical in protecting individuals from subsequent infection. Multiple groups 
have found that many ZIKV antibodies bind to domain III of E (EDIII), suggesting 
that this region is an important target of neutralizing antibodies. Here, we 
generated a chimeric virus containing ZIKV EDIII in a dengue virus backbone to 
measure ZIKV EDIII-specific antibody responses. We found that while polyclonal 
ZIKV immune serum contains antibodies targeting EDIII, they constitute only a 
small fraction of the total population of antibodies that neutralize ZIKV. 
Further studies are needed to define the main targets on the viral envelope 
recognized by human neutralizing antibodies, which is critical for guiding the 
development of ZIKV vaccines.

Copyright © 2019 Gallichotte et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01485-19
PMCID: PMC6751055
PMID: 31530669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]