1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 4;10(1):4017. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61103-1.

Virus Like Particles (VLP) as multivalent vaccine candidate against Chikungunya, 
Japanese Encephalitis, Yellow Fever and Zika Virus.

Garg H(1), Mehmetoglu-Gurbuz T(2), Joshi A(3).

Author information:
(1)Center of Emphasis in Infectious Diseases, Department of Molecular and 
Translational Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, 
TX, USA. Himanshu.garg@ttuhsc.edu.
(2)Center of Emphasis in Infectious Diseases, Department of Molecular and 
Translational Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, 
TX, USA.
(3)Center of Emphasis in Infectious Diseases, Department of Molecular and 
Translational Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, 
TX, USA. anjali.joshi@ttuhsc.edu.

Mosquito borne viral diseases are an emerging threat as evident from the recent 
outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) as well as repeated outbreaks of Chikungunya 
(CHIKV), Yellow fever (YFV) and Japanese encephalitis (JEV) virus in different 
geographical regions. These four arboviruses are endemic in overlapping regions 
due to the co-prevalence of the transmitting mosquito vector species Aedes and 
Culex. Thus, a multivalent vaccine that targets all four viruses would be of 
benefit to regions of the world where these diseases are endemic. We developed a 
potential Virus Like Particle (VLP) based multivalent vaccine candidate to 
target these diseases by using stable cell lines that continuously secrete VLPs 
in the culture supernatants. Moreover, inclusion of Capsid in the VLPs provides 
an additional viral protein leading to an enhanced immune response as evident 
from our previous studies with ZIKV. Immunization of Balb/c mice with different 
combinations of Capsid protein containing VLPs either as monovalent, bivalent or 
tetravalent formulation resulted in generation of high levels of neutralizing 
antibodies. Interestingly, the potential tetravalent VLP vaccine candidate 
provided strong neutralizing antibody titers against all four viruses. The 293 T 
stable cell lines secreting VLPs were adapted to grow in suspension cultures to 
facilitate vaccine scale up. Our stable cell lines secreting individual VLPs 
provide a flexible yet scalable platform conveniently adaptable to different 
geographical regions as per the need. Further studies in appropriate animal 
models will be needed to define the efficacy of the multivalent vaccine 
candidate to protect against lethal virus challenge.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-61103-1
PMCID: PMC7055223
PMID: 32132648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.