1. J Virol. 2020 May 4;94(10):e00089-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00089-20. Print 2020
May  4.

T Cell Responses Induced by Attenuated Flavivirus Vaccination Are Specific and 
Show Limited Cross-Reactivity with Other Flavivirus Species.

Grifoni A(1), Voic H(1), Dhanda SK(1), Kidd CK(1), Brien JD(2), Buus S(3), 
Stryhn A(3), Durbin AP(4), Whitehead S(5), Diehl SA(6), De Silva AD(1)(7), 
Balmaseda A(8), Harris E(9), Weiskopf D(1), Sette A(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(2)Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(5)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)University of Vermont School of Medicine, Burlington, Vermont, USA.
(7)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, General Sir John Kotelawala Defense 
University, Ratmalana, Sri Lanka.
(8)National Virology Laboratory, National Center for Diagnosis and Reference, 
Ministry of Health, Managua, Nicaragua.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, School of Public Health, 
University of California, Berkeley, California, USA.
(10)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, 
California, USA alex@lji.org.
(11)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.

Members of the flavivirus genus share a high level of sequence similarity and 
often circulate in the same geographical regions. However, whether T cells 
induced by one viral species cross-react with other related flaviviruses has not 
been globally addressed. In this study, we tested pools of epitopes derived from 
dengue (DENV), Zika (ZIKV), Japanese encephalitis (JEV), West Nile (WNV), and 
yellow fever (YFV) viruses by intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) using 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of individuals naturally exposed to 
DENV or immunized with DENV (TV005) or YF17D vaccine. CD8 T cell responses 
recognized epitopes from multiple flaviviruses; however, the magnitude of 
cross-reactive responses was consistently severalfold lower than those to the 
autologous epitope pools and was associated with lower expression of activation 
markers such as CD40L, CD69, and CD137. Next, we characterized the antigen 
sensitivity of short-term T cell lines (TCL) representing 29 different 
individual epitope/donor combinations. TCL derived from DENV monovalent 
vaccinees induced CD8 and CD4 T cells that cross-reacted within the DENV 
serocomplex but were consistently associated with >100-fold-lower antigen 
sensitivity for most other flaviviruses, with no cross-recognition of 
YFV-derived peptides. CD8 and CD4 TCL from YF17D vaccinees were associated with 
very limited cross-reactivity with any other flaviviruses and in five out of 
eight cases >1,000-fold-lower antigen sensitivity. Overall, our data suggest 
limited cross-reactivity for both CD4 and CD8 T cell responses between 
flaviviruses and have implications for understanding immunity elicited by 
natural infection and strategies to develop live attenuated vaccines against 
flaviviral species.IMPORTANCE The envelope (E) protein is the dominant target of 
neutralizing antibodies for dengue virus (DENV) and yellow fever virus (YFV). 
Accordingly, several DENV vaccine constructs use the E protein in a live 
attenuated vaccine format, utilizing a backbone derived from a heterologous 
flavivirus (such as YF) as a delivery vector. This backbone comprises the 
nonstructural (NS) and capsid (C) antigens, which are dominant targets of T cell 
responses. Here, we demonstrate that cross-reactivity at the level of T cell 
responses among different flaviviruses is very limited, despite high levels of 
sequence homology. Thus, the use of heterologous flavivirus species as a live 
attenuated vaccine vector is not likely to generate optimal T cell responses and 
might thus impair vaccine performance.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00089-20
PMCID: PMC7199411
PMID: 32132233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]