1. mBio. 2020 Apr 7;11(2):e02494-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02494-19.

A Chimeric Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine Protects against Lethal Yellow Fever 
Virus Infection without Inducing Neutralizing Antibodies.

Mishra N(1), Boudewijns R(1), Schmid MA(1), Marques RE(1), Sharma S(1), Neyts 
J(2), Dallmeier K(2).

Author information:
(1)KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega 
Institute, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Molecular Vaccinology and 
Vaccine Discovery Group, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega 
Institute, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Molecular Vaccinology and 
Vaccine Discovery Group, Leuven, Belgium johan.neyts@kuleuven.be 
kai.dallmeier@kuleuven.be.

Recent outbreaks of yellow fever virus (YFV) in West Africa and Brazil resulted 
in rapid depletion of global vaccine emergency stockpiles and raised concerns 
about being unprepared against future YFV epidemics. Here we report that a live 
attenuated virus similar to the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) vaccine 
JE-CVax/Imojev that consists of YFV-17D vaccine from which the structural 
(prM/E) genes have been replaced with those of the JEV SA14-14-2 vaccine strain 
confers full protection in mice against lethal YFV challenge. In contrast to the 
YFV-17D-mediated protection against YFV, this protection is not mediated by 
neutralizing antibodies but correlates with YFV-specific nonneutralizing 
antibodies and T cell responses against cell-associated YFV NS1 and other YFV 
nonstructural (NS) proteins. Our findings reveal the potential of YFV NS 
proteins to mediate protection and demonstrate that chimeric flavivirus 
vaccines, such as Imojev, could confer protection against two flaviviruses. This 
dual protection may have implications for the possible off-label use of JE-CVax 
in case of emergency and vaccine shortage during YFV outbreaks. In addition, 
populations in Asia that have been vaccinated with Imojev may already be 
protected against YFV should outbreaks ever occur on that continent, as several 
countries/regions in the Asia-Pacific are vulnerable to international spread of 
the YFV.IMPORTANCE Efficient and safe vaccines against yellow fever (e.g., 
YFV-17D) that provide long-lasting protection by rapidly inducing neutralizing 
antibody responses exist. However, the vaccine supply cannot cope with an 
increasing demand posed by urban outbreaks in recent years. Here we report that 
JE-CVax/Imojev, a YFV-17D-based chimeric Japanese encephalitis vaccine, also 
efficiently protects against YFV infection in mice. In case of shortage of the 
YFV vaccine during yellow fever outbreaks, (off-label) use of JE-CVax/Imojev may 
be considered. Moreover, wider use of JE-CVax/Imojev in Asia may lower the risk 
of the much-feared YFV spillover to the continent. More generally, chimeric 
vaccines that combine surface antigens and replication machineries of two 
distinct flaviviruses may be considered dual vaccines for the latter pathogen 
without induction of surface-specific antibodies. Following this rationale, 
novel flavivirus vaccines that do not hold a risk for antibody-dependent 
enhancement (ADE) of infection (inherent to current dengue vaccines and dengue 
vaccine candidates) could be designed.

Copyright © 2020 Mishra et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02494-19
PMCID: PMC7157777
PMID: 32265332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]