1. J Med Virol. 2021 Aug;93(8):4856-4864. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26978. Epub 2021 Apr
13.

Assessment of immunity against Yellow Fever virus infections in northeastern 
Nigeria using three serological assays.

Baba MM(1), Yahaya KM(1), Ezra EM(1), Adamu M(1), Kulloma BM(1), Ikusemoran 
M(2), Momoh JP(3), Oderinde BS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences, 
University of Maiduguri, Maiduguri, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Geography (Remote Sensing/GIS Unit), University of Maiduguri, 
Maiduguri, Borno State, Nigeria.
(3)Facts Foundation, Maiduguri, Borno State, Nigeria.

Poor systematic surveillance for Yellow Fever virus (YFV) is primarily due to 
lack of affordable diagnostic facilities in resource-constrained countries. This 
study aimed at providing evidence-based information on immunity against Yellow 
Fever with a view to assessing the possibility of the recent epidemics 
persisting in Nigeria. Six hundred patients with febrile illness seeking malaria 
test in selected hospitals were tested for YFV antibody using three serological 
assays: ELISA IgM, microneutralization test (MNT) and plaque reduction 
neutralization test (PRNT). The three assays commonly detected YFV antibody (Ab) 
in 1.7% patients, MNT: IgM in 8.3%, IgM: PRNT in 7.1%, and MNT: PRNT in 3.2%. 
Immunity against YF was significantly higher in Bauchi and Borno than Adamawa 
and children aged 0-9 years compared to 20-29 years. YFV neutralizing antibody 
(nAb) strongly correlated with the vaccination status of the patients. More 
unvaccinated patients had nAb compared with the vaccinated. Immunity against YF 
among treated patients with antibiotic and/or antimalaria before sample 
collection inversely correlated with the untreated. YVnAb among unvaccinated 
indicates natural infections. Acute YFV infections were mistaken for malaria and 
natural infections are ongoing. Individuals aged more than or equal to  20 years 
should be targeted during mass vaccination campaigns. With low population 
immunity, repetitive YF epidemics in Nigeria is not yet over. The current policy 
on Yellow Fever vaccination in Nigeria still leaves a large unimmunized 
population at the risk of epidemics. Sufficient mass vaccination in combination 
with National Programme on Immunization remains key to averting YF epidemics.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26978
PMID: 33783842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]