1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2023 Mar;41(5):1617-1638. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2021.2024253. Epub 2022 Jan 7.

Modeling mRNA-based vaccine YFV.E1988 against yellow fever virus E-protein using 
immuno-informatics and reverse vaccinology approach.

Khan NT(1), Zinnia MA(2), Islam ABMMK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Dhaka, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, East West University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

To surmount constraints of live-attenuated vaccines we have in silico designed 
mRNA vaccine using envelope protein as a target antigen. From the alignment of 
216 envelope proteins, a consensus sequence was obtained which was used for 
codon optimization. The secondary structure was predicted using Mfold and 
RNAfold tool. IEDB server was used to predict T-cell and B-cell epitopes, 
epitope conservancy, immunogenicity, and population coverage. Antigenicity, 
allergenicity, and toxicity were predicted using Vaxijen, AllerTOP, and 
ToxinPred tools, respectively. Interactions between MHC and identified epitopes 
were confirmed by docking and molecular dynamics simulation. In silico immune 
simulation was done using the C-ImmSim server. Vaccine peptide 3D structure was 
predicted and validated based on the Ramachandran plot. Finally, we designed the 
vaccine construct for simulating restriction cloning using the SnapGene tool. 
Our optimization of consensus E protein is highly immunogenic, conserved, has 
immune-dominance characteristics, and suggests high translational efficiency in 
the host cell. We validated the presence of T and B cell epitopes and 
interestingly we found one CD4+ and four CD8+ T-cell epitopes that satisfied all 
the criteria of an effective vaccine candidate. We found high-affinity 
interactions between epitope and HLA alleles that can stimulate the T-cell 
response. The immune simulation verified the immune cell response to eliminate 
the antigen. To ensure effective expression of the vaccine, a circular plasmid 
has been designed using in silico cloning approach for the in vitro 
transcription process. Obtained results suggest that the vaccine YFV.E1988 will 
elicit specific immune responses against YFV and it is a potential model ready 
for laboratory testing. HighlightsThe envelope (E) protein was found to be 
highly conserved and it has the potential to protect individuals against YFV 
infection.YFV.E1988 vaccine has been capable to stimulate both the CD8+ and CD4+ 
T cell, solving the major limitations of the current live-attenuated vaccines 
against YFV.Presence of T- and B-cell epitopes across the antigen have been 
validated using several computational tools.Molecular docking ensured the 
epitope-allele binding and protein-TLR/MR interaction. The vaccine was found to 
be immune-stimulatory, safe, and stable.The codons were optimized for efficient 
translation and increased stability into the human host. The UTR regions and 
poly (A) tail used for the development of YFV.E1988 showed immune stimulatory 
potential in several experiments.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.2024253
PMID: 34994279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]