1. Front Med Technol. 2021 Apr 12;3:640964. doi: 10.3389/fmedt.2021.640964. 
eCollection 2021.

Dengue Virus and Vaccines: How Can DNA Immunization Contribute to This 
Challenge?

Alves AMB(1), Costa SM(1), Pinto PBA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Physiology of Viral Infections, Instituto 
Oswaldo Cruz (IOC), Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Dengue infections still have a tremendous impact on public health systems in 
most countries in tropical and subtropical regions. The disease is systemic and 
dynamic with broad range of manifestations, varying from mild symptoms to severe 
dengue (Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever and Dengue Shock Syndrome). The only licensed 
tetravalent dengue vaccine, Dengvaxia, is a chimeric yellow fever virus with prM 
and E genes from the different dengue serotypes. However, recent results 
indicated that seronegative individuals became more susceptible to develop 
severe dengue when infected after vaccination, and now WHO recommends 
vaccination only to dengue seropositive people. One possibility to explain these 
data is the lack of robust T-cell responses and antibody-dependent enhancement 
of virus replication in vaccinated people. On the other hand, DNA vaccines are 
excellent inducers of T-cell responses in experimental animals and it can also 
elicit antibody production. Clinical trials with DNA vaccines have improved and 
shown promising results regarding the use of this approach for human 
vaccination. Therefore, in this paper we review preclinical and clinical tests 
with DNA vaccines against the dengue virus. Most of the studies are based on the 
E protein since this antigen is the main target for neutralizing antibody 
production. Yet, there are other reports with DNA vaccines based on 
non-structural dengue proteins with protective results, as well. Combining 
structural and non-structural genes may be a solution for inducing immune 
responses aging in different infection moments. Furthermore, DNA immunizations 
are also a very good approach in combining strategies for vaccines against 
dengue, in heterologous prime/boost regimen or even administering different 
vaccines at the same time, in order to induce efficient humoral and cellular 
immune responses.

Copyright © 2021 Alves, Costa and Pinto.

DOI: 10.3389/fmedt.2021.640964
PMCID: PMC8757892
PMID: 35047911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.