1. mBio. 2022 Jun 28;13(3):e0051222. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00512-22. Epub 2022 Apr
14.

Isolation of a Potently Neutralizing and Protective Human Monoclonal Antibody 
Targeting Yellow Fever Virus.

Doyle MP(#)(1), Genualdi JR(#)(1), Bailey AL(#)(2), Kose N(3), Gainza C(3), 
Rodriguez J(3), Reeder KM(3), Nelson CA(2), Jethva PN(4), Sutton RE(3), Bombardi 
RG(3), Gross ML(4), Julander JG(5), Fremont DH(2)(6)(7), Diamond MS(2)(7)(8), 
Crowe JE Jr(1)(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Centergrid.412807.8, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)The Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Centergrid.412807.8, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(5)Institute for Antiviral Research, Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary 
Sciences, Utah State Universitygrid.53857.3c, Logan, Utah, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Centergrid.412807.8, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    mBio. 2022 Jun 28;13(3):e0082422. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00824-22.

Yellow fever virus (YFV) causes sporadic outbreaks of infection in South America 
and sub-Saharan Africa. While live-attenuated yellow fever virus vaccines based 
on three substrains of 17D are considered some of the most effective vaccines in 
use, problems with production and distribution have created large populations of 
unvaccinated, vulnerable individuals in areas of endemicity. To date, specific 
antiviral therapeutics have not been licensed for human use against YFV or any 
other related flavivirus. Recent advances in monoclonal antibody (mAb) 
technology have allowed the identification of numerous candidate therapeutics 
targeting highly pathogenic viruses, including many flaviviruses. Here, we 
sought to identify a highly neutralizing antibody targeting the YFV envelope (E) 
protein as a therapeutic candidate. We used human B cell hybridoma technology to 
isolate mAbs from circulating memory B cells from human YFV vaccine recipients. 
These antibodies bound to recombinant YFV E protein and recognized at least five 
major antigenic sites on E. Two mAbs (designated YFV-136 and YFV-121) recognized 
a shared antigenic site and neutralized the YFV-17D vaccine strain in vitro. 
YFV-136 also potently inhibited infection by multiple wild-type YFV strains, in 
part, at a postattachment step in the virus replication cycle. YFV-136 showed 
therapeutic protection in two animal models of YFV challenge, including hamsters 
and immunocompromised mice engrafted with human hepatocytes. These studies 
define features of the antigenic landscape of the YFV E protein recognized by 
the human B cell response and identify a therapeutic antibody candidate that 
inhibits infection and disease caused by highly virulent strains of YFV. 
IMPORTANCE Yellow fever virus (YFV) is a mosquito-borne virus that occasionally 
causes outbreaks of severe infection and disease in South America and 
sub-Saharan Africa. There are very effective live-attenuated (weakened) yellow 
fever virus vaccines, but recent problems with their production and distribution 
have left many people in affected areas vulnerable. Here, we sought to isolate 
an antibody targeting the surface of the virus for possible use in the future as 
a biologic drug to prevent or treat YFV infection. We isolated naturally 
occurring antibodies from individuals who had received a YFV vaccine. We created 
antibodies and tested them. We found that the antibody with the most powerful 
antiviral activity was a beneficial treatment in two different small-animal 
models of human infection. These studies identified features of the virus that 
are recognized by the human immune system and generated a therapeutic antibody 
candidate that inhibits infection caused by highly virulent strains of YFV.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00512-22
PMCID: PMC9239089
PMID: 35420472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
M.L.G. is an unpaid member of the scientific advisory boards of Protein Metrics 
and GenNext. M.S.D. is a consultant for Inbios, Vir Biotechnology, Senda 
Biosciences, and Carnival Corporation and on the scientific advisory boards of 
Moderna and Immunome. The Diamond laboratory has received funding support in 
sponsored research agreements from Moderna, Vir Biotechnology, and Emergent 
BioSolutions. J.E.C. has served as a consultant for Luna Innovations, Merck, 
GlaxoSmithKline, is a member of the scientific advisory board of Meissa Vaccines 
and is Founder of IDBiologics. The Crowe laboratory at Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center has received unrelated sponsored research agreements from 
IDBiologics, AstraZeneca and Takeda.