1. Vaccine. 2023 Feb 17;41(8):1457-1470. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.11.051. Epub
 2023 Jan 24.

Evaluation of safety and immuno-efficacy of a next generation live-attenuated 
yellow fever vaccine in cynomolgus macaques.

Piras-Douce F(1), Broudic K(2), Chautard E(3), Raynal F(4), Courtois V(5), 
Gautheron S(6), Mantel N(7).

Author information:
(1)Research and External Innovation, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic 
address: fabienne.piras-douce@sanofi.com.
(2)Non-Clinical Safety, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic address: 
karine.broudic@sanofi.com.
(3)Scientific and Digital Innovation, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic 
address: emilie.chautard@sanofi.com.
(4)Research and External Innovation, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic 
address: franck.raynal@sanofi.com.
(5)Research and External Innovation, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic 
address: virginie.courtois@sanofi.com.
(6)Biostatistics R&D, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic address: 
sylviane.gautheron@sanofi.com.
(7)Research and External Innovation, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France. Electronic 
address: nathalie.mantel@sanofi.com.

The increased demand for yellow fever (YF) vaccines over the last decade, along 
with insufficient availability of specific pathogen-free embryonated eggs 
required for timely vaccine production, has led to global YF vaccine shortages. 
A new live-attenuated YF vaccine candidate (generically referred to as vYF) 
cloned from a YF-VAX® vaccine (YF-17D vaccine) substrain adapted for growth in 
Vero cells cultured in serum-free media is currently in development. Here, we 
assessed the safety and immunogenicity of vYF, and its protective activity upon 
virulent challenge with wild-type yellow fever virus (YFV) Asibi, compared to 
licensed YF-17D vaccines in the translational cynomolgus macaque model. vYF was 
well tolerated with no major safety concerns. Vaccine-related safety 
observations were limited to minimal/minor microscopic findings at the injection 
sites and in the draining lymph nodes, consistent with expected stimulation of 
the immune system. vYF induced early differential expression of genes involved 
in antiviral innate immunity previously described in humans vaccinated with 
YF-17D vaccines, as well as YFV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies, high and 
sustained YFV neutralizing antibody titers from Day 14 up to at least Day 258 
post-immunization, IgM+ and IgG+ memory B cells from Day 14 up to at least Day 
221 post-vaccination, and Th1 interferon (IFN)-γ and interleukin (IL)-2 
secreting effector and memory T cells. Additionally, vYF provided effective 
resistance to virulent challenge with wild-type YFV Asibi including complete 
protection against YFV-induced mortality, pathology, dysregulation of blood and 
liver soluble biomarkers, and a significant reduction in viremia and viral load 
to the limit of detection. These NHP data suggest that vYF would provide 
protection against YFV infection in practice, at least similar to that achieved 
with currently marketed YF-17D vaccines.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.11.051
PMID: 36702693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: All authors are employees of Sanofi 
and may hold shares and/or stock options in the company.