1. Int J Infect Dis. 2023 Apr;129:142-151. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2023.01.033. Epub 
2023 Feb 1.

Antibody cross-reactivity and evidence of susceptibility to emerging 
Flaviviruses in the dengue-endemic Brazilian Amazon.

Salgado BB(1), Maués FCJ(1), Jordão M(1), Pereira RL(1), Toledo-Teixeira DA(2), 
Parise PL(2), Granja F(3), Souza HFS(4), Yamamoto MM(4), Chiang JO(5), Martins 
LC(5), Boscardin SB(4), Lalwani JDB(6), Vasconcelos PFC(7), Proença-Modena 
JL(8), Lalwani P(9).

Author information:
(1)Leônidas e Maria Deane Institute (ILMD), Fiocruz Amazônia, Manaus, Amazonas, 
Brazil; Laboratory of infectious diseases and immunology, ILMD/Fiocruz Amazônia 
and PPGIBA/ICB-UFAM, Manaus, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Emerging Viruses, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Emerging Viruses, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, 
Brazil; Biodiversity Research Center, Federal University of Roraima, Roraima, 
Brazil.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(5)Evandro Chagas Institute (IEC), Arbovirology and Hemorrhagic Fever Sector, 
Ananindeua, Pará, Brazil.
(6)Pharmaceutical Science College (FCF), Universidade Federal do Amazonas 
(UFAM), Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(7)Department of Pathology, Para State University, Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(8)Laboratory of Emerging Viruses, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, 
Brazil; Experimental Medicine Research Cluster (EMRC), University of Campinas, 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Leônidas e Maria Deane Institute (ILMD), Fiocruz Amazônia, Manaus, Amazonas, 
Brazil; Laboratory of infectious diseases and immunology, ILMD/Fiocruz Amazônia 
and PPGIBA/ICB-UFAM, Manaus, Brazil. Electronic address: 
pritesh.lalwani@fiocruz.br.

OBJECTIVES: Several Flaviviruses can co-circulate. Pre-existing immunity to one 
virus can modulate the response to a heterologous virus; however, the 
serological cross-reaction between these emerging viruses in dengue virus 
(DENV)-endemic regions are poorly understood.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed among the residents of Manaus 
city in the state of Amazonas, Brazil. The serological response was assessed by 
hemagglutination inhibition assay (HIA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and 
neutralization assay.
RESULTS: A total of 74.52% of the participants were immunoglobulin G-positive 
(310/416), as estimated by lateral flow tests. Overall, 93.7% of the 
participants were seropositive (419/447) for at least one DENV serotype, and the 
DENV seropositivity ranged between 84.8% and 91.0%, as determined by HIA. About 
93% had antiyellow fever virus 17D-reactive antibodies, whereas 80.5% reacted to 
wild-type yellow fever virus. Zika virus (ZIKV) had the lowest seropositivity 
percentage (52.6%) compared with other Flaviviruses. Individuals who were 
DENV-positive with high antibody titers by HIA or envelope protein domain III 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay reacted strongly with ZIKV, whereas 
individuals with low anti-DENV antibody titers reacted poorly toward ZIKV. Live 
virus neutralization assay with ZIKV confirmed that dengue serogroup and 
ZIKV-spondweni serogroup are far apart; hence, individuals who are DENV-positive 
do not cross-neutralize ZIKV efficiently.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, we observed a high prevalence of DENV in the 
Manaus-Amazon region and a varying degree of cross-reactivity against emerging 
and endemic Flaviviruses. Epidemiological and exposure conditions in Manaus make 
its population susceptible to emerging and endemic arboviruses.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2023.01.033
PMID: 36736575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no competing interests to declare.