1. J Med Virol. 2023 Apr;95(4):e28700. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28700.

Performance assessment and validation of a plaque reduction neutralization test 
(PRNT) in support to yellow fever diagnostic and vaccine clinical trials.

Dia M(1), Bob NS(1), Talla C(2), Dupressoir A(3), Escadafal C(4), Thiam MS(2), 
Diallo A(2), Ndiaye O(1), Heraud JM(1), Faye O(1), Sall AA(1), Faye O(1), Fall 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Virology Department, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(2)Epidemiology, Clinical Research and Data Science Department, Institute 
Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(3)Unité Physiologie et Pathologie Moléculaires des Rétrovirus Endogènes et 
Infectieux, CNRS UMR 9196, Villejuif, France.
(4)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Geneva, Switzerland.

Yellow fever (YF) virus is a mosquito-borne virus belonging to the Flaviviridae 
family that circulates in tropical and subtropical areas of Africa and South 
America. Despite the availability of an effective vaccine, YF remains a threat 
to travelers, residents of endemic areas, and unvaccinated populations. YF 
vaccination and natural infection both induce the production of neutralizing 
antibodies. Serological diagnostic methods detecting YF virus-specific 
antibodies demonstrate high levels of cross-reactivities with other 
flaviviruses. To date, the plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) is the 
most specific serological test for the differentiation of flavivirus infections 
and is considered the reference method for detecting YF neutralizing antibodies 
and assessing the protective immune response following vaccination. In this 
study, we developed and validated a YF PRNT. We optimized different parameters 
including cell concentration and virus-serum neutralization time period and then 
assessed the intra- and inter-assay precisions, dilutability, specificity, and 
lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) using international standard YF serum, sera 
from vaccinees and human specimens collected through YF surveillance. The YF 
PRNT has shown good robustness and 100% of intra-assay precision, 95.6% of 
inter-assay precision, 100% of specificity, 100% of LLOQ, and 95.3% of 
dilutability. The test is, therefore, suitable for use in the YF diagnostic as 
well as evaluation of the YF vaccine neutralizing antibody response and risk 
assessment studies.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Medical Virology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28700
PMID: 36951314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]