1. J Genet Eng Biotechnol. 2023 Dec 5;21(1):161. doi: 10.1186/s43141-023-00621-7.

Exploring structural antigens of yellow fever virus to design multi-epitope 
subunit vaccine candidate by utilizing an immuno-informatics approach.

Sura K(#)(1), Rohilla H(#)(1), Kumar D(1), Jakhar R(1), Ahlawat V(1)(2), Kaushik 
D(1), Dangi M(3), Chhillar AK(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Bioinformatics, M.D. University, Rohtak, Haryana, India.
(2)Centre for Biotechnology, M.D. University, Rohtak, Haryana, India.
(3)Centre for Bioinformatics, M.D. University, Rohtak, Haryana, India. 
mehakdangi2007@gmail.com.
(4)Centre for Biotechnology, M.D. University, Rohtak, Haryana, India. 
anil.chhillar@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Yellow fever is a mosquito-borne viral hemorrhagic disease 
transmitted by several species of virus-infected mosquitoes endemic to tropical 
regions of Central and South America and Africa. Earlier in the twentieth 
century, mass vaccination integrated with mosquito control was implemented to 
eradicate the yellow fever virus. However, regular outbreaks occur in these 
regions which pose a threat to travelers and residents of Africa and South 
America. There is no specific antiviral therapy, but there can be an effective 
peptide-based vaccine candidate to combat infection caused by the virus. 
Therefore, the study aims to design a multi-epitope-based subunit vaccine (MESV) 
construct against the yellow fever virus to reduce the time and cost using 
reverse vaccinology (RV) approach.
METHODS: Yellow fever virus contains 10,233 nucleotides that encode for 10 
proteins (C, prM, E, NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) including 3 
structural and 7 non-structural proteins. Structural proteins-precursor membrane 
protein (prM) and envelope protein (E)-were taken as a target for B cell and T 
cell epitope screening. Further, various immunoinformatics approaches were 
employed to FASTA sequences of structural proteins to retrieve B cell and T cell 
epitopes. MESV was constructed from these epitopes based on allergenicity, 
antigenicity and immunogenicity, toxicity, conservancy, and population coverage 
followed by structure prediction. The efficacy of the MESV construct to bind 
with human TLR-3, TLR-4, and TLR-8 were evaluated using molecular docking and 
simulation studies. Finally, in-silico cloning of vaccine construct was 
performed withpBR322 Escherichia coli expression system using codon 
optimization.
RESULTS: Predicted epitopes evaluated and selected for MESV construction were 
found stable, non-allergenic, highly antigenic, and global population coverage 
of 68.03% according to in-silico analysis. However, this can be further tested 
in in-vitro and in-vivo investigations. Epitopes were sequentially merged to 
construct a MESV consisting of 393 amino acids using adjuvant and linkers. 
Molecular docking and simulation studies revealed stable and high-affinity 
interactions. Furthermore, in-silico immune response graphs showed effective 
immune response generation. Finally, higher CAI value ensured high gene 
expression of vaccine in the host cell.
CONCLUSION: The designed MESV construct in the present in-silico study can be 
effective in generating an immune response against the yellow fever virus. 
Therefore, to prevent yellow fever, it can be an effective vaccine candidate. 
However, further downstream, in-vitro study is required.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s43141-023-00621-7
PMCID: PMC10697922
PMID: 38051433

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.