1. Microbiol Spectr. 2025 Apr;13(4):e0334824. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.03348-24.
Epub  2025 Mar 4.

The development and validation of a microneutralization assay for the detection 
and quantification of anti-yellow fever virus antibodies in human serum.

Fries K(1), Luo P(1), Baldwin R(1), Goldberg R(1), Ordonez I(2), Zheng L(3), 
Huleatt J(1), Devlin L(1).

Author information:
(1)Global Clinical Immunology, Sanofi, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Translational and Early Development Biostatistics, Sanofi, Orlando, Florida, 
USA.
(3)Translational and Early Development Biostatistics, Sanofi, Swiftwater, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

The plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) has been used widely for the 
detection and quantitation of yellow fever (YF) virus-neutralizing antibodies in 
human serum; however, it is labor-intensive and challenging to adapt to 
high-throughput clinical testing needed for vaccine licensure. Here, we describe 
the development and validation of a new Vero cell-based YF microneutralization 
(MN) assay, with immunostaining readout, for the detection and quantification of 
YF virus-neutralizing antibodies in human serum. Comparison of neutralizing 
antibody titers measured with the YF MN assay versus the historical YF PRNT, 
based on a 50% reduction in plaque counts (PRNT50), demonstrated 100% serostatus 
agreement at a titer of 10 (1/dil) in participants with a history of YF 
vaccination. For validation, intra-assay precision (repeatability), intermediate 
precision, dilutional accuracy, linearity, specificity, upper limit of 
quantitation (ULOQ), and lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ) were assessed. The 
YF MN assay demonstrated suitable intra-assay precision (repeatability) and 
intermediate precision of 36% and 54%, respectively, with an ULOQ of 10,240. At 
the lower end of detection, repeatability and intermediate precision were 38% 
and 41%, respectively, with a LLOQ of 10 (1/dil). Suitable dilutional accuracy, 
linearity, and specificity across orthoflaviviruses (dengue virus, Japanese 
encephalitis virus, and Zika virus) and serum matrices (hemolytic, lipemic, and 
icteric) were also demonstrated. Overall, these promising results led the Center 
for Biologics Evaluation and Research to confirm the suitability of the 
validated YF MN assay for the detection and quantification of YF 
virus-neutralizing antibodies.
IMPORTANCE: With increased globalization and shifting climate patterns, yellow 
fever (YF) is re-emerging as a global threat. At present, vaccination remains 
the most effective prevention strategy. This study describes the development and 
validation of a new YF microneutralization (MN) assay for the detection and 
quantification of YF virus-neutralizing antibodies in human serum that offers 
increased throughput compared with the current standard assay. Overall, the YF 
MN assay demonstrated acceptable intra-assay precision (repeatability), 
intermediate precision, dilutional accuracy, linearity, and specificity and is 
suitable for the detection of YF virus-neutralizing antibodies. Further, the 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) supports the use of the YF 
MN assay in the licensure of candidate YF vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.03348-24
PMCID: PMC11960057
PMID: 40035587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.F., P.L., R.B., R.G., I.O., and L.D. are 
employees of Sanofi and may hold shares and/or stock options in the company. 
L.Z. and J.H. were employed by Sanofi at the time of this study.