1. Front Immunol. 2025 Apr 29;16:1569454. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1569454. 
eCollection 2025.

A bivalent self-amplifying RNA vaccine against yellow fever and Zika viruses.

Battisti P(1), Ykema MR(1), Kasal DN(1), Jennewein MF(1), Beaver S(1), Weight 
AE(2), Hanson D(3), Singh J(1), Bakken J(1), Cross N(1), Fusco P(1), Archer 
J(3), Reed S(1), Gerhardt A(1), Julander JG(2), Casper C(1)(4)(5)(6), Voigt 
EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Access to Advanced Health Institute (AAHI), formerly Infectious Disease 
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States.
(2)Institute for Antiviral Research, Utah State University, Logan, UT, United 
States.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(5)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United 
States.
(6)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutch Cancer Center, Seattle, 
WA, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Yellow fever (YFV) and Zika (ZIKV) viruses cause significant 
morbidity and mortality, despite the existence of an approved YFV vaccine and 
the development of multiple ZIKV vaccine candidates to date. New technologies 
may improve access to vaccines against these pathogens. We previously described 
a nanostructured lipid carrier (NLC)-delivered self-amplifying RNA (saRNA) 
vaccine platform with excellent thermostability and immunogenicity, appropriate 
for prevention of tropical infectious diseases.
METHODS: YFV and ZIKV prM-E antigen-expressing saRNA constructs were created 
using a TC-83 strain Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus-based replicon and 
complexed with NLC by simple mixing. Monovalent and bivalent vaccine 
formulations were injected intramuscularly into C57BL/6 mice and Syrian golden 
hamsters, and the magnitude, durability, and protective efficacy of the 
resulting immune responses were then characterized.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Monovalent vaccines established durable neutralizing 
antibody responses to their respective flaviviral targets, with little evidence 
of cross-neutralization. Both vaccines additionally elicited robust 
antigen-reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations. Notably, humoral responses to 
YFV saRNA-NLC vaccination were comparable to those in YF-17D-vaccinated animals. 
Bivalent formulations established humoral and cellular responses against both 
viral targets, commensurate to those established by monovalent vaccines, without 
evidence of saRNA interference or immune competition. Finally, both monovalent 
and bivalent vaccines completely protected mice and hamsters against lethal ZIKV 
and YFV challenge. We present a bivalent saRNA-NLC vaccine against YFV and ZIKV 
capable of inducing robust and efficacious neutralizing antibody and cellular 
immune responses against both viruses. These data support the development of 
other multivalent saRNA-based vaccines against infectious diseases.

Copyright © 2025 Battisti, Ykema, Kasal, Jennewein, Beaver, Weight, Hanson, 
Singh, Bakken, Cross, Fusco, Archer, Reed, Gerhardt, Julander, Casper and Voigt.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1569454
PMCID: PMC12069283
PMID: 40364846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AG and EV are co-inventors on U.S. patent 
application nos. PCT/US21/40388, “Co-lyophilized RNA and Nanostructured Lipid 
Carrier,” and 63/144,169, “A thermostable, flexible RNA vaccine delivery 
platform for pandemic response.” The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.