1. Nature. 2026 Jan;649(8095):173-182. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09689-2. Epub 2025
 Oct 29.

Multiple LDLR family members act as entry receptors for yellow fever virus.

Chong Z(1), Hui S(2), Qiu X(3), Palakurty S(1)(2), Sariol A(1), Kaszuba T(2), 
Nguyen MN(2), Li P(1), Raju S(1)(2), Hall PD(2), Nelson CA(2), Baltazar-Perez 
I(2), Price DA(1), Rothlauf PW(4), Crowe JE(5), Whelan SPJ(4), Leung DW(1), 
Amarasinghe GK(2), Bailey AL(3), Fremont DH(2)(4)(6), Diamond 
MS(7)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA. mdiamond@wustl.edu.
(8)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. mdiamond@wustl.edu.
(9)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. mdiamond@wustl.edu.
(10)Andrew M. and Jane M. Bursky Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy 
Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. 
mdiamond@wustl.edu.
(11)Center for Vaccines and Immunity to Microbial Pathogens, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. mdiamond@wustl.edu.

Infection by yellow fever virus (YFV), the prototype Orthoflavivirus, induces a 
febrile syndrome in humans that can progress to liver failure, haemorrhage and 
death1. Despite decades of study, the entry receptors for YFV remain unclear. 
Here, using a surface protein-targeted CRISPR-Cas9 screen, we identified LRP4, a 
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) family member, as a candidate entry 
receptor for YFV. Genetic ablation of LRP4 impaired YFV infection of cells and, 
reciprocally, complementation or ectopic expression of LRP4 increased infection. 
Related viruses in the YFV antigenic complex also showed LRP4-dependent 
infection. LRP4 promoted YFV entry into cells through LDLR type A (LA) domain 
binding to domain III of the YFV envelope protein. Soluble LRP4-Fc decoy 
receptors neutralized YFV infection in cell culture and reduced viral burden in 
vivo. As we observed residual YFV infection in LRP4-deficient cells, we 
evaluated whether other LDLR family members promote YFV entry. This approach 
identified LRP1 and VLDLR as additional receptors for YFV infection in cell 
culture. LRP1-Fc, LRP4-Fc and VLDLR-Fc decoys protected mice from YFV challenge, 
and LRP1-Fc decoys inhibited YFV infection and liver pathogenesis in mice 
engrafted with human hepatocytes. A genetic deficiency of LRP1 in primary human 
hepatocyte cultures also resulted in reduced YFV infection. Our findings 
establish a role for multiple LDLR family members in YFV entry, infection and 
pathogenesis, which has implications for receptor use and countermeasure 
development for multiple emerging orthoflaviviruses.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-025-09689-2
PMID: 41162706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: M.S.D. is a consultant or 
on a scientific advisory board for Inbios, IntegerBio, Akagera Medicines, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Merck and Moderna. The Diamond laboratory has received 
unrelated funding support in sponsored research agreements from Vir 
Biotechnology, Bavarian Nordic and Moderna. J.E.C. is a former member of the 
scientific advisory boards of Gigagen (Grifols) and BTG International, has 
consulted for Moderna, is founder of IDBiologics and receives royalties from 
UpToDate. The Crowe laboratory received unrelated sponsored research agreements 
from IDBiologics during the conduct of the study.