1. Vaccine. 2026 Apr 19;79:128510. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2026.128510. Epub 2026 
Mar 24.

Neutralizing antibody titers do not predict T cell response to live-attenuated 
orthoflaviviral vaccination in humans.

Ooi JSG(1), Hamis NZ(2), Tan HC(1), Yee JX(2), Chew VSY(2), Lim JME(1), Ong 
EZ(2), Chan KR(1), Rivino L(3), Low JG(4), Ooi EE(5), Kalimuddin S(6).

Author information:
(1)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(2)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore; 
Viral Research and Experimental Medicine Centre, SingHealth Duke-NUS Academic 
Medical Centre, Singapore.
(3)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, UK.
(4)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore; 
Viral Research and Experimental Medicine Centre, SingHealth Duke-NUS Academic 
Medical Centre, Singapore; Department of Infectious Diseases, Singapore General 
Hospital, Singapore.
(5)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore; 
Viral Research and Experimental Medicine Centre, SingHealth Duke-NUS Academic 
Medical Centre, Singapore; Department of Clinical Translational Research, 
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore; Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: 
engeong.ooi@duke-nus.edu.sg.
(6)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore; 
Department of Infectious Diseases, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore. 
Electronic address: shirin.kalimuddin@singhealth.com.sg.

Viral vaccine development has mostly relied on measuring neutralizing antibody 
responses to evaluate vaccine immunogenicity. Yet, a compelling body of evidence 
has now demonstrated that T cell immunity, an integral component of the adaptive 
immune response, also plays a critical role in controlling acute viral 
infection. T cell responses however, are not routinely measured in clinical 
trials to assess vaccine potency. If neutralizing antibody titers were indeed 
statistically associated with the magnitude of vaccine-induced antigen-specific 
T cell responses induced by a vaccine, then arguably T cell response could be 
inferred directly from antibody titers, without the need for independent 
measurement. To test this assumption, we examined, in a cohort of adult 
vaccinees, both neutralizing antibody titers and T cell responses induced by the 
live-attenuated yellow fever vaccine (YF17D). Crucially, we found no correlation 
between neutralizing antibody titers and the magnitude of antigen-specific T 
cell responses. Consistent with this observation, transcriptional profiling 
revealed distinct innate immune signatures that independently correlated with B 
and T cell immunity, suggesting that dichotomous pathways shape humoral and 
cellular immune responses separately. Protein-level analysis further supported 
this dichotomy, showing that discrete cytokine and chemokine profiles were 
selectively associated with neutralizing antibody production or T cell 
responses. Our findings suggest that neutralizing antibody titers may not always 
be a reliable proxy for vaccine-induced T cell response, and highlight the need 
for the independent measurement of T cell immunity in vaccine studies, 
particularly for viral infections where the protective role of T cells has been 
clearly demonstrated.

Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2026.128510
PMID: 41880822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.