1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2002;267:309-22. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-59403-8_15.

The role of birds in the ecology of West Nile virus in Europe and Africa.

Malkinson M(1), Banet C.

Author information:
(1)Kimron Veterinary Institute, Beit Dagan 50250, Israel.

Surveys on wild birds conducted during the last two decades in Europe, notably 
Poland and the Czech Republic, to determine their infection rate with WN virus 
have revealed endemic foci of infection. Some species of seropositive birds were 
nonmigrators while others were hatchlings of migrating species. Persistently 
infected avian reservoirs are potential sources of viruses for mosquitoes that 
multiply in the temperate European zone in hot, wet summers. In the past, 
evidence for geographical circulation of WN viruses was based on antigenic 
analysis of strains from different countries while more recent epidemiological 
studies have relied on analysis of nucleotide sequences of the envelope gene. 
With the reappearance of epidemic WN fever in European countries, interest has 
been focused once again on the African origin of the causal agent carried by 
migrating wild birds. In some epidemics, isolates were made from human cases or 
mosquitoes and only serologic evidence for infection was available from domestic 
and wild bird populations. In this respect the unusual findings of anti-WN virus 
antibodies in a population of storks maintained in northern Germany could be 
interpreted as evidence for local infection. The unique susceptibility of young 
domestic geese in Israel in 1997-2000 to WN virus and the isolation of similar 
strains from migrating White storks in Israel and Egypt suggest that the recent 
isolates are more pathogenic for certain avain species and that migrating birds 
do play a crucial role in geographical spread of the virus. Knowledge of the 
routes taken by birds migrating between Africa and Europe will therefore help in 
selecting sites where attempts to isolate viruses will be most fruitful. The 
appearance of the disease in western European equine populations (Italy and 
France) requires that other birds and their migratory routes be investigated 
once more. It remains to be determined whether the European endemic foci of WN 
virus are in themselves sources of infection for other birds that migrate across 
Europe and do not necessarily reach sub-Saharan Africa. If this is the case it 
will be necessary to define the strategies for detection of virus overwintering 
in the European temperate climate.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-59403-8_15
PMID: 12082995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]