1. Virology. 2006 Mar 1;346(1):53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2005.10.030. Epub 2005
 Dec 2.

A rapid and quantitative assay for measuring antibody-mediated neutralization of 
West Nile virus infection.

Pierson TC(1), Sánchez MD, Puffer BA, Ahmed AA, Geiss BJ, Valentine LE, Altamura 
LA, Diamond MS, Doms RW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. piersontc@mail.nih.gov

West Nile virus (WNV) is a neurotropic flavivirus within the Japanese 
encephalitis antigenic complex that is responsible for causing West Nile 
encephalitis in humans. The surface of WNV virions is covered by a highly 
ordered icosahedral array of envelope proteins that is responsible for mediating 
attachment and fusion with target cells. These envelope proteins are also 
primary targets for the generation of neutralizing antibodies in vivo. In this 
study, we describe a novel approach for measuring antibody-mediated 
neutralization of WNV infection using virus-like particles that measure 
infection as a function of reporter gene expression. These reporter virus 
particles (RVPs) are produced by complementation of a sub-genomic replicon with 
WNV structural proteins provided in trans using conventional DNA expression 
vectors. The precision and accuracy of this approach stem from an ability to 
measure the outcome of the interaction between antibody and viral antigens under 
conditions that satisfy the assumptions of the law of mass action as applied to 
virus neutralization. In addition to its quantitative strengths, this approach 
allows the production of WNV RVPs bearing the prM-E proteins of different WNV 
strains and mutants, offering considerable flexibility for the study of the 
humoral immune response to WNV in vitro. WNV RVPs are capable of only a single 
round of infection, can be used under BSL-2 conditions, and offer a rapid and 
quantitative approach for detecting virus entry and its inhibition by 
neutralizing antibody.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2005.10.030
PMID: 16325883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]