1. J Zoo Wildl Med. 2008 Dec;39(4):537-41. doi: 10.1638/2006-0041.1.

Serologic response to West Nile virus vaccination in the greater one-horned 
rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis).

Wolf TM(1), Gandolf AR, Dooley JL, Atkinson MW, Wolfe BA.

Author information:
(1)The Wilds, Cumberland, Ohio 43732, USA. tiffany.wolf@state.mm.us

Vaccination has been an important component of preventative health care programs 
of North American zoologic institutions in their protection of valuable species 
against West Nile virus (WNV) infection since its detection in 1999. Although 
approved only for horses, commercial WNV vaccine has been used for the purpose 
of protection of nondomestic species, including avian, equid, and rhinoceros 
species. Currently, there are two commercial equine vaccines available, a killed 
vaccine and a recombinant viral-vectored vaccine. Both products have been used 
for the vaccination of Greater One-horned rhinoceroses (Rhinoceros unicornis) 
held in North American zoologic institutions. In this study, the efficacy of 
these vaccines was evaluated in Greater One-horned rhinoceroses based on the 
humoral immune response stimulated by vaccine administration. Five rhinoceroses 
were vaccinated in 2005 by using the killed equine vaccine and four received 
boosters in 2006 by using the recombinant vaccine. Rhinoceroses were evaluated 
for differences in pre- and postvaccination neutralizing antibody titer and 
gamma and beta globulins on serum protein electrophoresis. No changes were 
observed after administration of the killed vaccine; however, antibody titers 
were observed in two of four rhinoceroses after administration of the 
recombinant vaccine. No significant changes were observed in the serum protein 
electrophoresis after either vaccine. Based on these findings, the WNV 
recombinant vaccine appeared to induce a more measurable humoral immune response 
than the killed product in the Greater One-horned rhinoceros. However, further 
investigation of both vaccines is warranted to evaluate whether changes in the 
frequency of administration, dosage, or adjuvant might stimulate an improved 
humoral response in these animals.

DOI: 10.1638/2006-0041.1
PMID: 19110693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]