1. J Virol Methods. 2010 Sep;168(1-2):177-90. doi:
10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.05.012.  Epub 2010 May 19.

Mammalian expression of functional autologous red cell agglutination reagents 
for use in diagnostic assays.

Hobson-Peters J(1), Shan J, Hall RA, Toye P.

Author information:
(1)AGEN Biomedical Limited, Acacia Ridge, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
j.peters2@uq.edu.au

The autologous red cell agglutination assay reagent consists of an antibody or 
antibody fragment of a human erythrocyte-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) 
conjugated to an antigen of interest. This bi-functional reagent causes the 
agglutination of the patient's erythrocytes in the presence of the 
antigen-specific antibodies in the patient's serum. Previously, such reagents 
have been produced either by chemical conjugation or recombinant expression in 
bacteria. These protocols required laborious processes for purification and 
refolding. The aim of the work reported in this article was to explore the 
production of the agglutination assay reagent as both a single chain Fv (scFv) 
antibody fragment and recombinant full-length mAb, expressed in a secreted form 
in commonly used mammalian cell lines. The DNA encoding the anti-erythrocyte 
antibodies was linked to that of a diagnostic peptide from West Nile virus, 
which requires glycosylation for recognition by antibodies present in the sera 
of infected horses. The expression vectors were designed to allow the rapid 
directional insertion of DNA encoding other immunogenic peptides to mediate the 
secretion of agglutinating scFv and full-length mAb reagents from transfected 
mammalian cells. Stable cell lines were produced for the expression of most, but 
not all of the constructs. The recombinant reagents could be used directly from 
the cell culture media after a simple concentration step. The results indicate 
that further modifications to increase the yield of recombinant protein will 
enable the direct use of culture supernatant in diagnostic assays without 
further processing.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.05.012
PMID: 20488206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]