1. Virol J. 2010 Jul 6;7:146. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-146.

A VLP-based vaccine targeting domain III of the West Nile virus E protein 
protects from lethal infection in mice.

Spohn G(1), Jennings GT, Martina BE, Keller I, Beck M, Pumpens P, Osterhaus AD, 
Bachmann MF.

Author information:
(1)Cytos Biotechnology, Schlieren, Switzerland. gunther.spohn@cytos.com

BACKGROUND: Since its first appearance in the USA in 1999, West Nile virus (WNV) 
has spread in the Western hemisphere and continues to represent an important 
public health concern. In the absence of effective treatment, there is a medical 
need for the development of a safe and efficient vaccine. Live attenuated WNV 
vaccines have shown promise in preclinical and clinical studies but might carry 
inherent risks due to the possibility of reversion to more virulent forms. 
Subunit vaccines based on the large envelope (E) glycoprotein of WNV have 
therefore been explored as an alternative approach. Although these vaccines were 
shown to protect from disease in animal models, multiple injections and/or 
strong adjuvants were required to reach efficacy, underscoring the need for more 
immunogenic, yet safe DIII-based vaccines.
RESULTS: We produced a conjugate vaccine against WNV consisting of recombinantly 
expressed domain III (DIII) of the E glycoprotein chemically cross-linked to 
virus-like particles derived from the recently discovered bacteriophage AP205. 
In contrast to isolated DIII protein, which required three administrations to 
induce detectable antibody titers in mice, high titers of DIII-specific 
antibodies were induced after a single injection of the conjugate vaccine. These 
antibodies were able to neutralize the virus in vitro and provided partial 
protection from a challenge with a lethal dose of WNV. Three injections of the 
vaccine induced high titers of virus-neutralizing antibodies, and completely 
protected mice from WNV infection.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunogenicity of DIII can be strongly enhanced by conjugation 
to virus-like particles of the bacteriophage AP205. The superior immunogenicity 
of the conjugate vaccine with respect to other DIII-based subunit vaccines, its 
anticipated favourable safety profile and low production costs highlight its 
potential as an efficacious and cost-effective prophylaxis against WNV.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-146
PMCID: PMC2914671
PMID: 20604940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]