1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):1994-2003. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01886-10. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Immunodominance and functional activities of antibody responses to inactivated 
West Nile virus and recombinant subunit vaccines in mice.

Zlatkovic J(1), Stiasny K, Heinz FX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, A-1095 Vienna, Austria.

Factors controlling the dominance of antibody responses to specific sites in 
viruses and/or protein antigens are ill defined but can be of great importance 
for the induction of potent immune responses to vaccines. West Nile virus and 
other related important human-pathogenic flaviviruses display the major target 
of neutralizing antibodies, the E protein, in an icosahedral shell at the virion 
surface. Potent neutralizing antibodies were shown to react with the upper 
surface of domain III (DIII) of this protein. Using the West Nile virus system, 
we conducted a study on the immunodominance and functional quality of E-specific 
antibody responses after immunization of mice with soluble protein E (sE) and 
isolated DIII in comparison to those after immunization with inactivated whole 
virions. With both virion and sE, the neutralizing response was dominated by 
DIII-specific antibodies, but the functionality of these antibodies was almost 
four times higher after virion immunization. Antibodies induced by the isolated 
DIII had an at least 15-fold lower specific neutralizing activity than those 
induced by the virion, and only 50% of these antibodies were able to bind to 
virus particles. Our results suggest that immunization with the tightly packed E 
in virions focuses the DIII antibody response to the externally exposed sites of 
this domain which are the primary targets for virus neutralization, different 
from sE and isolated DIII, which also display protein surfaces that are cryptic 
in the virion. Despite its low potency for priming, DIII was an excellent 
boosting antigen, suggesting novel vaccination strategies that strengthen and 
focus the antibody response to critical neutralizing sites in DIII.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01886-10
PMCID: PMC3067796
PMID: 21147919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]