1. Hum Vaccin. 2011 Mar;7(3):331-8. doi: 10.4161/hv.7.3.14262. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Geminiviral vectors based on bean yellow dwarf virus for production of vaccine 
antigens and monoclonal antibodies in plants.

Chen Q(1), He J, Phoolcharoen W, Mason HS.

Author information:
(1)The Biodesign Institute and School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.

Expression of recombinant vaccine antigens and monoclonal antibodies using plant 
viral vectors has developed extensively during the past several years. The 
approach benefits from high yields of recombinant protein obtained within days 
after transient delivery of viral vectors to leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana, a 
tobacco relative. Modified viral genomes of both RNA and DNA viruses have been 
created. Geminiviruses such as bean yellow dwarf virus (BeYDV) have a small, 
single stranded DNA genome that replicates in the nucleus of an infected plant 
cell, using the cellular DNA synthesis apparatus and a virus-encoded replication 
initiator protein (Rep). BeYDV-derived expression vectors contain deletions of 
the viral genes encoding coat and movement proteins and insertion of an 
expression cassette for a protein of interest. Delivery of the geminiviral 
vector to leaf cells via Agrobacterium-mediated delivery produces very high 
levels of recombinant DNA that can act as a transcription template, yielding 
high levels of mRNA for the protein of interest. Several vaccine antigens, 
including Norwalk virus capsid protein and hepatitis B core antigen, were 
expressed using the BeYDV vector at levels up to 1 mg per g of leaf mass. BeYDV 
replicons can be stacked in the same vector molecule by linking them in tandem, 
which enables production of multi-subunit proteins like monoclonal antibody 
(mAb) heavy and light chains. The protective mAb 6D8 against Ebola virus was 
produced at 0.5 mg per g of leaf mass. Multi-replicon vectors could be 
conveniently used to produce protein complexes, e.g. virus-like particles that 
require two or more subunits.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.7.3.14262
PMCID: PMC3166492
PMID: 21358270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]