1. Vaccine. 2011 Aug 26;29(37):6352-7. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.04.116. Epub 
2011 May 17.

A DNA vaccine encoding the E protein of West Nile virus is protective and can be 
boosted by recombinant domain DIII.

Schneeweiss A(1), Chabierski S, Salomo M, Delaroque N, Al-Robaiy S, Grunwald T, 
Bürki K, Liebert UG, Ulbert S.

Author information:
(1)Vaccine Technologies Unit, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and 
Immunology, Perlickstrasse 1, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

West Nile Virus (WNV) is an emerging pathogenic flavivirus with increasing 
distribution worldwide. Birds are the natural host of the virus, but also 
mammals, including humans, can be infected. In some cases, a WNV infection can 
be associated with severe neurological symptoms. All currently available WNV 
vaccines are in the veterinary sector, and there is a need to develop safe and 
effective immunization technologies, which can also be used in humans. An 
alternative to current vaccination methods is DNA immunization. Most current DNA 
vaccine candidates against flaviviruses simultaneously express the viral 
envelope (E) and membrane (prM) proteins, which leads to the formation of 
virus-like particles. Here we generated a DNA plasmid, which expresses only the 
E-protein ectodomain. Vaccination of mice stimulated anti-WNV T-cell responses 
and neutralizing antibodies that were higher than those obtained after 
immunizing with a recombinant protein previously shown to be a protective WNV 
vaccine. A single dose of the plasmid was sufficient to protect animals from a 
lethal challenge with the virus. Moreover, immunogenicity could be boosted when 
DNA injection was followed by immunization with recombinant domain DIII of the 
E-protein. This resulted in significantly enhanced neutralizing antibody titers 
and a more prominent cellular immune response. The results suggest that the WNV 
E-protein is sufficient as a protective antigen in DNA vaccines and that 
protection can be significantly improved by adding a recombinant protein boost 
to the DNA prime.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.04.116
PMID: 21596075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]