1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002111. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002111. Epub 
2011 Jun 30.

A dynamic landscape for antibody binding modulates antibody-mediated 
neutralization of West Nile virus.

Dowd KA(1), Jost CA, Durbin AP, Whitehead SS, Pierson TC.

Author information:
(1)Viral Pathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Neutralizing antibodies are a significant component of the host's protective 
response against flavivirus infection. Neutralization of flaviviruses occurs 
when individual virions are engaged by antibodies with a stoichiometry that 
exceeds a required threshold. From this "multiple-hit" perspective, the 
neutralizing activity of antibodies is governed by the affinity with which it 
binds its epitope and the number of times this determinant is displayed on the 
surface of the virion. In this study, we investigated time-dependent changes in 
the fate of West Nile virus (WNV) decorated with antibody in solution. 
Experiments with the well-characterized neutralizing monoclonal antibody (MAb) 
E16 revealed a significant increase in neutralization activity over time that 
could not be explained by the kinetics of antibody binding, virion aggregation, 
or the action of complement. Additional kinetic experiments using the 
fusion-loop specific MAb E53, which has limited neutralizing activity because it 
recognizes a relatively inaccessible epitope on mature virions, identified a 
role of virus "breathing" in regulating neutralization activity. Remarkably, MAb 
E53 neutralized mature WNV in a time- and temperature-dependent manner. This 
phenomenon was confirmed in studies with a large panel of MAbs specific for 
epitopes in each domain of the WNV envelope protein, with sera from recipients 
of a live attenuated WNV vaccine, and in experiments with dengue virus. Given 
enough time, significant inhibition of infection was observed even for 
antibodies with very limited, or no neutralizing activity in standard 
neutralization assays. Together, our data suggests that the structural dynamics 
of flaviviruses impacts antibody-mediated neutralization via exposure of 
otherwise inaccessible epitopes, allowing for antibodies to dock on the virion 
with a stoichiometry sufficient for neutralization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002111
PMCID: PMC3128118
PMID: 21738473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.