1. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(7):3501-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06435-11. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

A novel approach for the rapid mutagenesis and directed evolution of the 
structural genes of west nile virus.

Lin TY(1), Dowd KA, Manhart CJ, Nelson S, Whitehead SS, Pierson TC.

Author information:
(1)Viral Pathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Molecular clone technology has proven to be a powerful tool for investigating 
the life cycle of flaviviruses, their interactions with the host, and vaccine 
development. Despite the demonstrated utility of existing molecular clone 
strategies, the feasibility of employing these existing approaches in 
large-scale mutagenesis studies is limited by the technical challenges of 
manipulating relatively large molecular clone plasmids that can be quite 
unstable when propagated in bacteria. We have developed a novel strategy that 
provides an extremely rapid approach for the introduction of mutations into the 
structural genes of West Nile virus (WNV). The backbone of this technology is a 
truncated form of the genome into which DNA fragments harboring the structural 
genes are ligated and transfected directly into mammalian cells, bypassing 
entirely the requirement for cloning in bacteria. The transfection of cells with 
this system results in the rapid release of WNV that achieves a high titer 
(∼10(7) infectious units/ml in 48 h). The suitability of this approach for 
large-scale mutagenesis efforts was established in two ways. First, we 
constructed and characterized a library of variants encoding single defined 
amino acid substitutions at the 92 residues of the "pr" portion of the 
precursor-to-membrane (prM) protein. Analysis of a subset of these variants 
identified a mutation that conferred resistance to neutralization by an envelope 
protein-specific antibody. Second, we employed this approach to accelerate the 
identification of mutations that allow escape from neutralizing antibodies. 
Populations of WNV encoding random changes in the E protein were produced in the 
presence of a potent monoclonal antibody, E16. Viruses resistant to 
neutralization were identified in a single passage. Together, we have developed 
a simple and rapid approach to produce infectious WNV that accelerates the 
process of manipulating the genome to study the structure and function of the 
structural genes of this important human pathogen.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06435-11
PMCID: PMC3302547
PMID: 22258236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]