1. Vaccine. 2012 Jun 19;30(29):4301-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.09.114.

Flaviviruses and flavivirus vaccines.

Heinz FX(1), Stiasny K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15, 
1095 Vienna, Austria. franz.x.heinz@meduniwien.ac.at

Several human-pathogenic flaviviruses (including yellow fever, dengue, Japanese 
encephalitis, West Nile and tick-borne encephalitis viruses) have a significant 
public health impact in different parts of the world and the potential of 
emerging in previously non-endemic regions. For some viruses, the structure of 
the most important immunogen, the envelope protein E, has been determined to 
atomic resolution by X-ray crystallography, and the architecture of virus 
particles has been resolved by cryo-electron microscopy. Through the combination 
of structural and immunological investigations, we now have a detailed 
understanding of the mechanisms of virus neutralization and antibody-dependent 
enhancement (ADE) of infectivity at a molecular level. The latter phenomenon has 
been proposed to play an important role in the immunopathology of severe forms 
of dengue virus infections (hemorrhagic dengue fever and dengue shock syndrome) 
and is therefore of special relevance in the context of dengue vaccines. 
Effective human vaccines are in use for the prophylaxis of yellow fever (live 
attenuated), Japanese encephalitis (live attenuated and inactivated whole 
virus), and tick-borne encephalitis (inactivated whole virus). Although dengue 
is the most important flavivirus with respect to global disease incidence, the 
development and use of vaccines has been hampered so far by the theoretical risk 
of vaccine-related adverse events such as immune enhancement of infection and 
the requirement to induce a long-lasting protective immune response against all 
four dengue serotypes simultaneously. Currently, several kinds of dengue 
vaccines are in development, but only one of these candidates (a chimeric 
dengue-yellow fever live attenuated vaccine) has reached the stage of phase 3 
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.09.114
PMID: 22682286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]