1. Virol J. 2012 Jul 16;9:132. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-132.

Induction of antigen-specific immune responses in mice by recombinant 
baculovirus expressing premembrane and envelope proteins of West Nile virus.

Zhu B(1), Ye J, Lu P, Jiang R, Yang X, Fu ZF, Chen H, Cao S.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: West Nile Virus (WNV) is an emerging arthropod-born flavivirus with 
increasing distribution worldwide that is responsible for a large proportion of 
viral encephalitis in humans and horses. Given that there are no effective 
antiviral drugs available for treatment of the disease, efforts have been 
directed to develop vaccines to prevent WNV infection. Recently baculovirus has 
emerged as a novel and attractive gene delivery vehicle for mammalian cells.
RESULTS: In the present study, recombinant baculoviruses expressing WNV 
premembrane (prM) and envelope (E) proteins under the cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
promoter with or without vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV/G) were 
constructed. The recombinant baculoviruses designated Bac-G-prM/E and Bac-prM/E, 
efficiently express E protein in mammalian cells. Intramuscular injection of the 
two recombinant baculoviruses (at doses of 108 or 109 PFU/mouse) induced the 
production of WNV-specific antibodies, neutralizing antibodies as well as gamma 
interferon (IFN-γ) in a dose-dependent pattern. Interestingly, the recombinant 
baculovirus Bac-G-prM/E was found to be a more efficient immunogen than 
Bac-prM/E to elicit a robust immune response upon intramuscular injection. In 
addition, inoculation of baculovirus resulted in the secretion of inflammatory 
cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-2 and IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: These recombinant baculoviruses are capable of eliciting robust 
humoral and cellular immune responses in mice, and may be considered as novel 
vaccine candidates for West Nile Virus.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-132
PMCID: PMC3424137
PMID: 22799608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]