1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45851. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045851. Epub 2012 Sep
25.

Effect of serum heat-inactivation and dilution on detection of anti-WNV 
antibodies in mice by West Nile virus E-protein microsphere immunoassay.

Namekar M(1), Kumar M, O'Connell M, Nerurkar VR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, 
Pacific Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases Research, John A. Burns School 
of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.

Immunopathogenesis studies employing West Nile virus (WNV) mice model are 
important for the development of antivirals and vaccines against WNV. Since 
antibodies produced in mice early during WNV infection are essential for 
clearing virus from the periphery, it is important to detect early and 
persistent anti-WNV antibodies. ELISA and plaque reduction neutralization tests 
are traditionally used for detection of anti-WNV antibodies and WNV-neutralizing 
antibodies, respectively. Although these assays are sensitive and specific, they 
are expensive and time consuming. Microsphere immunoassays (MIA) are sensitive, 
specific, allow for high throughput, are cost effective, require less time to 
perform than other methods, and require low serum volumes. Several assay 
parameters such as serum heat-inactivation (HI) and dilution can alter WNV MIA 
sensitivity. We examined the effect of these parameters on WNV E-protein MIA 
(WNV E-MIA) for the enhanced detection of anti-WNV IgM and IgG antibodies. WNV 
E-MIA was conducted using serial dilutions of HI and non-HI (NHI) serum 
collected at various time points from mice inoculated with WNV. HI significantly 
enhanced detection of IgM and IgG antibodies as compared to NHI serum. WNV IgM 
and IgG antibodies in HI sera were detected earlier at day 3 and IgM antibodies 
persisted up to day 24 after infection. HI serum at 1∶20 dilution was found to 
be optimal for detection of both IgM and IgG antibodies as compared to 
higher-serum dilutions. Further, addition of exogenous complement to the HI 
serum decreased the WNV E-MIA sensitivity. These results suggest that serum-HI 
and optimal dilution enhance WNV E-MIA sensitivity by eliminating the complement 
interference, thereby detecting low-titer anti-WNV antibodies during early and 
late phases of infection. This improved MIA can also be readily employed for 
detection of low-titer antibodies for detection of other infectious agents and 
host proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045851
PMCID: PMC3457982
PMID: 23049879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.