1. Biologics. 2012;6:409-16. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S37792. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Limited cross-reactivity of mouse monoclonal antibodies against Dengue virus 
capsid protein among four serotypes.

Noda M(1), Masrinoul P, Punkum C, Pipattanaboon C, Ramasoota P, Setthapramote C, 
Sasaki T, Sasayama M, Yamashita A, Kurosu T, Ikuta K, Okabayashi T.

Author information:
(1)Mahidol-Osaka Center for Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Ratchathewi, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Dengue illness is one of the important mosquito-borne viral diseases 
in tropical and subtropical regions. Four serotypes of dengue virus (DENV-1, 
DENV-2, DENV-3, and DENV-4) are classified in the Flavivirus genus of the family 
Flaviviridae. We prepared monoclonal antibodies against DENV capsid protein from 
mice immunized with DENV-2 and determined the cross-reactivity with each 
serotype of DENV and Japanese encephalitis virus.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To clarify the relationship between the cross-reactivity of 
monoclonal antibodies and the diversity of these viruses, we examined the 
situations of flaviviruses by analyses of phylogenetic trees. Among a total of 
60 prepared monoclonal antibodies specific for DENV, five monoclonal antibodies 
stained the nuclei of infected cells and were found to be specific to the capsid 
protein. Three were specific to DENV-2, while the other two were cross-reactive 
with DENV-2 and DENV-4. No monoclonal antibodies were cross-reactive with all 
four serotypes. Phylogenetic analysis of DENV amino acid sequences of the capsid 
protein revealed that DENV-2 and DENV-4 were clustered in the same branch, while 
DENV-1 and DENV-3 were clustered in the other branch. However, these 
classifications of the capsid protein were different from those of the envelope 
and nonstructural 1 proteins. Phylogenetic distances between the four serotypes 
of DENV were as different as those of other flaviviruses, such as Japanese 
encephalitis virus and West Nile virus. Large variations in the DENV serotypes 
were comparable with the differences between species of flavivirus. Furthermore, 
the diversity of flavivirus capsid protein was much greater than that of 
envelope and nonstructural 1 proteins.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we produced specific monoclonal antibodies that can 
be used to detect DENV-2 capsid protein, but not a cross-reactive one with all 
serotypes of DENV capsid protein. The high diversity of the DENV capsid protein 
sequence by phylogenetic analysis supported the low cross-reactivity of 
monoclonal antibodies against DENV capsid protein.

DOI: 10.2147/BTT.S37792
PMCID: PMC3512249
PMID: 23209363