1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2013 Jan;47(1):164-72. doi: 10.5578/mb.4474.

[A case of central nervous system infection due to west nile virus lineage-1 in 
ankara province, Turkey].

[Article in Turkish]

Ocal M(1), Onder H, Arsava EM, Alp S, Ozkul A, Ergünay K.

Author information:
(1)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
Virology Unit, Ankara, Turkey. ekoray@hacettepe.edu.tr.

West Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquito-borne Flavivirus (family Flaviviridae), 
maintained in an enzootic cycle between birds as amplifying hosts and mosquito 
vectors. While WNV exposure in humans frequently remain subclinical, a febrile 
illness called West Nile fever occurs in about 20% and neuroinvasive disease in 
less than 1% of the affected individuals. For the last two decades, WNV has 
caused outbreaks of severe neuroinvasive disease in humans and horses in Europe, 
the Mediterranean Basin and emerged in the American continent. Although, 
previous serosurveillance reports have revealed human WNV exposure in various 
regions in Turkey; well-characterized clinical cases have only been reported 
after 2009-2010. In this report, a case of WNV encephalitis caused by a Lineage 
1 virus strain and identified in Ankara province, Central Anatolia, Turkey, was 
presented. An 87 year-old woman with a history of hypertension and a recent 
febrile episode was admitted to Hacettepe University Hospital in late May 2012, 
with altered consciousness, myoclonic jerks in facial muscles and left 
extremity. Hyponatremia and increased alanine and aspartate aminotransferase 
levels were noted in blood analyses. Initial electroencephalogram (EEG) 
demonstrated diffuse slow waves. Areas of restricted diffusion in right dorsal 
thalamus was observed in cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Despite 
supportive therapy, the patient's neurological condition worsened. Follow-up EEG 
displayed paroxysmal lateralizing epileptiform discharges (PLEDs) in the right 
hemisphere and T2-hyperintense lesions in the right temporoparietal cortex, 
insula and thalamus with components of cytotoxic and vasogenic edema were 
observed in MRI. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-serum pair was evaluated to 
identify potential causes of encephalitis. CSF biochemical and microscopic 
findings were within normal limits except for decreased glucose levels. 
Bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal cultures, antigen assays and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) employed for Herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 were 
negative. Commercial and in house assays for WNV, tick-borne encephalitis virus, 
Toscana virus (TOSV) antibodies revealed TOSV IgG in serum. Previously described 
nested PCRs targeting WNV envelope glycoprotein and phlebovirus consensus 
sequences demonstrated WNV positive results in serum and CSF, which were further 
characterized via cycle sequencing of amplicons as WNV Lineage 1 Clade 1a. Four 
serum samples obtained within 23 days after the diagnosis were negative for 
viral RNA and specific antibodies via commercial assays and WNV plaque reduction 
neutralization assay. During follow-up with supportive therapy and 
anti-epileptics, the patient's general and neurological condition improved 
mildly and control EEG and MRI demonstrated regression of previous lesions. 
However, the patient passed away on the 10th week of hospital admission due to 
nosocomial infections. These findings confirmed the inital data which indicated 
the circulation of WNV Lineage 1 strains in Central Anatolia, Turkey. WNV 
seroconversion may be delayed or absent in elderly individuals without overt 
diseases associated with immunosuppression. Thus investigation of WNV RNA 
together with the specific serological tests may help the accurate diagnosis of 
suspected cases.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.4474
PMID: 23390915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]