1. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60838. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060838. Epub 2013 Apr
2.

Lectin-dependent enhancement of Ebola virus infection via soluble and 
transmembrane C-type lectin receptors.

Brudner M(1), Karpel M, Lear C, Chen L, Yantosca LM, Scully C, Sarraju A, 
Sokolovska A, Zariffard MR, Eisen DP, Mungall BA, Kotton DN, Omari A, Huang IC, 
Farzan M, Takahashi K, Stuart L, Stahl GL, Ezekowitz AB, Spear GT, Olinger GG, 
Schmidt EV, Michelow IC.

Author information:
(1)Programs of Developmental Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is a key soluble effector of the innate immune 
system that recognizes pathogen-specific surface glycans. Surprisingly, 
low-producing MBL genetic variants that may predispose children and 
immunocompromised individuals to infectious diseases are more common than would 
be expected in human populations. Since certain immune defense molecules, such 
as immunoglobulins, can be exploited by invasive pathogens, we hypothesized that 
MBL might also enhance infections in some circumstances. Consequently, the low 
and intermediate MBL levels commonly found in human populations might be the 
result of balancing selection. Using model infection systems with pseudotyped 
and authentic glycosylated viruses, we demonstrated that MBL indeed enhances 
infection of Ebola, Hendra, Nipah and West Nile viruses in low complement 
conditions. Mechanistic studies with Ebola virus (EBOV) glycoprotein pseudotyped 
lentiviruses confirmed that MBL binds to N-linked glycan epitopes on viral 
surfaces in a specific manner via the MBL carbohydrate recognition domain, which 
is necessary for enhanced infection. MBL mediates lipid-raft-dependent 
macropinocytosis of EBOV via a pathway that appears to require less actin or 
early endosomal processing compared with the filovirus canonical endocytic 
pathway. Using a validated RNA interference screen, we identified C1QBP (gC1qR) 
as a candidate surface receptor that mediates MBL-dependent enhancement of EBOV 
infection. We also identified dectin-2 (CLEC6A) as a potentially novel candidate 
attachment factor for EBOV. Our findings support the concept of an innate immune 
haplotype that represents critical interactions between MBL and complement 
component C4 genes and that may modify susceptibility or resistance to certain 
glycosylated pathogens. Therefore, higher levels of native or exogenous MBL 
could be deleterious in the setting of relative hypocomplementemia which can 
occur genetically or because of immunodepletion during active infections. Our 
findings confirm our hypothesis that the pressure of infectious diseases may 
have contributed in part to evolutionary selection of MBL mutant haplotypes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060838
PMCID: PMC3614905
PMID: 23573288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.