1. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e64761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064761. Print 
2013.

Comparative genomic and phylogenetic analysis of the first Usutu virus isolate 
from a human patient presenting with neurological symptoms.

Gaibani P(1), Cavrini F, Gould EA, Rossini G, Pierro A, Landini MP, Sambri V.

Author information:
(1)Operative Unit of Clinical Microbiology, Regional Reference Centre for 
Microbiological Emergencies-CRREM, St.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, 
Bologna, Italy. paolo.gaibani@unibo.it

Usutu virus (USUV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus, belonging to the Japanese 
encephalitis antigenic complex, that circulates among mosquitoes and birds. We 
describe and analyze the complete genome sequence of the first USUV strain 
isolated from an immunocompromised patient with neuroinvasive disease. This USUV 
isolate showed an overall nucleotide identity of 99% and 96%, respectively, with 
the genomes of isolates from Europe and Africa. Comparison of the human USUV 
complete polyprotein sequence with bird-derived strains, showed two unique amino 
acid substitutions. In particular, one substitution (S595G) was situated in the 
DIII domain of the viral Envelope protein that is recognized by flavivirus 
neutralizing antibodies. An additional amino acid substitution (D3425E) was 
identified in the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain of the NS5 protein. 
This substitution is remarkable since E3425 is highly conserved among the other 
USUV isolates that were not associated with human infection. However, a similar 
substitution was observed in Japanese encephalitis and in West Nile viruses 
isolated from humans. Phylogenetic analysis of the human USUV strain revealed a 
close relationship with an Italian strain isolated in 2009. Analysis of 
synonymous nucleotide substitutions (SNSs) among the different USUV genomes 
showed a specific evolutionary divergence among different countries. In 
addition, 15 SNSs were identified as unique in the human isolate. We also 
identified four specific nucleotide substitutions in the 5' and 3' untranslated 
regions (UTRs) in the human isolate that were not present in the other USUV 
sequences. Our analyses provide the basis for further experimental studies aimed 
at defining the effective role of these mutations in the USUV genome, their 
potential role in the development of viral variants pathogenic for humans and 
their evolution and dispersal out of Africa.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064761
PMCID: PMC3669420
PMID: 23741387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist