1. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(18):10324-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00480-13. Epub 2013 Jul
17.

An inactivated cell culture Japanese encephalitis vaccine (JE-ADVAX) formulated 
with delta inulin adjuvant provides robust heterologous protection against West 
Nile encephalitis via cross-protective memory B cells and neutralizing antibody.

Petrovsky N(1), Larena M, Siddharthan V, Prow NA, Hall RA, Lobigs M, Morrey J.

Author information:
(1)Vaxine Pty. Ltd., Adelaide, Australia. nikolai.petrovsky@flinders.edu.au

West Nile virus (WNV), currently the cause of a serious U.S. epidemic, is a 
mosquito-borne flavivirus and member of the Japanese encephalitis (JE) 
serocomplex. There is currently no approved human WNV vaccine, and treatment 
options remain limited, resulting in significant mortality and morbidity from 
human infection. Given the availability of approved human JE vaccines, this 
study asked whether the JE-ADVAX vaccine, which contains an inactivated cell 
culture JE virus antigen formulated with Advax delta inulin adjuvant, could 
provide heterologous protection against WNV infection in wild-type and 
β2-microglobulin-deficient (β2m(-/-)) murine models. Mice immunized twice or 
even once with JE-ADVAX were protected against lethal WNV challenge even when 
mice had low or absent serum cross-neutralizing WNV titers prior to challenge. 
Similarly, β2m(-/-) mice immunized with JE-ADVAX were protected against lethal 
WNV challenge in the absence of CD8(+) T cells and prechallenge WNV antibody 
titers. Protection against WNV could be adoptively transferred to naive mice by 
memory B cells from JE-ADVAX-immunized animals. Hence, in addition to increasing 
serum cross-neutralizing antibody titers, JE-ADVAX induced a memory B-cell 
population able to provide heterologous protection against WNV challenge. 
Heterologous protection was reduced when JE vaccine antigen was administered 
alone without Advax, confirming the importance of the adjuvant to induction of 
cross-protective immunity. In the absence of an approved human WNV vaccine, 
JE-ADVAX could provide an alternative approach for control of a major human WNV 
epidemic.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00480-13
PMCID: PMC3754008
PMID: 23864620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]