1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2013 Nov 12;10(11):6049-83. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph10116049.

Flaviviruses in Europe: complex circulation patterns and their consequences for 
the diagnosis and control of West Nile disease.

Beck C(1), Jimenez-Clavero MA, Leblond A, Durand B, Nowotny N, Leparc-Goffart I, 
Zientara S, Jourdain E, Lecollinet S.

Author information:
(1)UMR1161 Virologie INRA, ANSES, ENVA, EU-RL on equine West Nile disease, 
Animal Health Laboratory, ANSES, Maisons-Alfort 94704, France. 
sylvie.lecollinet@anses.fr.

In Europe, many flaviviruses are endemic (West Nile, Usutu, tick-borne 
encephalitis viruses) or occasionally imported (dengue, yellow fever viruses). 
Due to the temporal and geographical co-circulation of flaviviruses in Europe, 
flavivirus differentiation by diagnostic tests is crucial in the adaptation of 
surveillance and control efforts. Serological diagnosis of flavivirus infections 
is complicated by the antigenic similarities among the Flavivirus genus. Indeed, 
most flavivirus antibodies are directed against the highly immunogenic envelope 
protein, which contains both flavivirus cross-reactive and virus-specific 
epitopes. Serological assay results should thus be interpreted with care and 
confirmed by comparative neutralization tests using a panel of viruses known to 
circulate in Europe. However, antibody cross-reactivity could be advantageous in 
efforts to control emerging flaviviruses because it ensures partial 
cross-protection. In contrast, it might also facilitate subsequent diseases, 
through a phenomenon called antibody-dependent enhancement mainly described for 
dengue virus infections. Here, we review the serological methods commonly used 
in WNV diagnosis and surveillance in Europe. By examining past and current 
epidemiological situations in different European countries, we present the 
challenges involved in interpreting flavivirus serological tests and setting up 
appropriate surveillance programs; we also address the consequences of 
flavivirus circulation and vaccination for host immunity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph10116049
PMCID: PMC3863887
PMID: 24225644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]