1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 4;9(2):e87837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087837.
eCollection  2014.

Vaccination of mice using the West Nile virus E-protein in a DNA prime-protein 
boost strategy stimulates cell-mediated immunity and protects mice against a 
lethal challenge.

De Filette M(1), Soehle S(2), Ulbert S(3), Richner J(4), Diamond MS(4), 
Sinigaglia A(5), Barzon L(5), Roels S(6), Lisziewicz J(7), Lorincz O(7), Sanders 
NN(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Gene Therapy, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Ghent University, 
Merelbeke, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Immunology, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and 
Immunology, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Departments of Medicine, Molecular Microbiology and Pathology and Immunology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of 
America.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(6)Operational Direction Interactions and Surveillance, Veterinary and 
Agrochemical Research Centre (CODA/CERVA), Brussels, Belgium.
(7)Genetic Immunity, Budapest, Hungary and McLean, Virginia, United States of 
America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(2):e91631.

West Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that is endemic in Africa, 
the Middle East, Europe and the United States. There is currently no antiviral 
treatment or human vaccine available to treat or prevent WNV infection. DNA 
plasmid-based vaccines represent a new approach for controlling infectious 
diseases. In rodents, DNA vaccines have been shown to induce B cell and 
cytotoxic T cell responses and protect against a wide range of infections. In 
this study, we formulated a plasmid DNA vector expressing the ectodomain of the 
E-protein of WNV into nanoparticles by using linear polyethyleneimine (lPEI) 
covalently bound to mannose and examined the potential of this vaccine to 
protect against lethal WNV infection in mice. Mice were immunized twice 
(prime--boost regime) with the WNV DNA vaccine formulated with lPEI-mannose 
using different administration routes (intramuscular, intradermal and topical). 
In parallel a heterologous boost with purified recombinant WNV envelope (E) 
protein was evaluated. While no significant E-protein specific humoral response 
was generated after DNA immunization, protein boosting of DNA-primed mice 
resulted in a marked increase in total neutralizing antibody titer. In addition, 
E-specific IL-4 T-cell immune responses were detected by ELISPOT after protein 
boost and CD8(+) specific IFN-γ expression was observed by flow cytometry. 
Challenge experiments using the heterologous immunization regime revealed 
protective immunity to homologous and virulent WNV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087837
PMCID: PMC3913677
PMID: 24503579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Marina De Filette, Silke 
Soehle, Sebastian Ulbert, Justin Richner, Michael S. Diamond, Alessandro 
Sinigaglia, Luisa Barzon, Stefan Roels and Niek N. Sanders have no competing 
interests. Julianna Lisziewicz and Orsolya Lorincz are shareholders of Genetic 
Immunity. Their role in the manuscript was supplying the WNV-DermaVir vaccine 
and critical reading of the manuscript. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.