1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 13;9(3):e89601. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089601. 
eCollection 2014.

Circulation of a Meaban-like virus in yellow-legged gulls and seabird ticks in 
the western Mediterranean basin.

Arnal A(1), Gómez-Díaz E(2), Cerdà-Cuéllar M(3), Lecollinet S(4), Pearce-Duvet 
J(5), Busquets N(6), García-Bocanegra I(7), Pagès N(6), Vittecoq M(8), Hammouda 
A(9), Samraoui B(10), Garnier R(5), Ramos R(5), Selmi S(9), González-Solís 
J(11), Jourdain E(12), Boulinier T(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, UMR 5175, CNRS, Montpellier, 
France; Centre de recherche de la Tour du Valat, Arles, France.
(2)Institut de Biologia Evolutiva CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries (IRTA), Barcelona, Spain; 
Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
(UAB)-Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentaries (IRTA), Bellaterra 
(Cerdanyola del Vallès), Spain.
(4)UMR1161 Virologie INRA, ANSES, ENVA, Animal Health Laboratory ANSES, 
Maisons-Alfort, France.
(5)Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, UMR 5175, CNRS, Montpellier, 
France.
(6)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona (UAB)-Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentaries (IRTA), 
Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès), Spain.
(7)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Universidad de Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.
(8)Centre de recherche de la Tour du Valat, Arles, France.
(9)Département des Sciences de la Vie, Faculté des Sciences de Gabès, Gabès, 
Tunisia.
(10)Laboratoire de Recherche et de Conservation des Zones Humides, University of 
Guelma, Guelma, Algeria; Center of Excellence for Research in Biodiversity, King 
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(11)Institut de Recerca de la Biodiversitat (IRBio), Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain; Departament de Biologia Animal, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(12)INRA, UR346, Unité d'Epidémiologie Animale, Saint Genès Champanelle, France.

In recent years, a number of zoonotic flaviviruses have emerged worldwide, and 
wild birds serve as their major reservoirs. Epidemiological surveys of bird 
populations at various geographical scales can clarify key aspects of the 
eco-epidemiology of these viruses. In this study, we aimed at exploring the 
presence of flaviviruses in the western Mediterranean by sampling breeding 
populations of the yellow-legged gull (Larus michahellis), a widely distributed, 
anthropophilic, and abundant seabird species. For 3 years, we sampled eggs from 
19 breeding colonies in Spain, France, Algeria, and Tunisia. First, ELISAs were 
used to determine if the eggs contained antibodies against flaviviruses. Second, 
neutralization assays were used to identify the specific flaviviruses present. 
Finally, for colonies in which ELISA-positive eggs had been found, chick serum 
samples and potential vectors, culicid mosquitoes and soft ticks (Ornithodoros 
maritimus), were collected and analyzed using serology and PCR, respectively. 
The prevalence of flavivirus-specific antibodies in eggs was highly spatially 
heterogeneous. In northeastern Spain, on the Medes Islands and in the nearby 
village of L'Escala, 56% of eggs had antibodies against the flavivirus envelope 
protein, but were negative for neutralizing antibodies against three common 
flaviviruses: West Nile, Usutu, and tick-borne encephalitis viruses. 
Furthermore, little evidence of past flavivirus exposure was obtained for the 
other colonies. A subset of the Ornithodoros ticks from Medes screened for 
flaviviral RNA tested positive for a virus whose NS5 gene was 95% similar to 
that of Meaban virus, a flavivirus previously isolated from ticks of Larus 
argentatus in western France. All ELISA-positive samples subsequently tested 
positive for Meaban virus neutralizing antibodies. This study shows that gulls 
in the western Mediterranean Basin are exposed to a tick-borne Meaban-like 
virus, which underscores the need of exploring the spatial and temporal 
distribution of this flavivirus as well as its potential pathogenicity for 
animals and humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089601
PMCID: PMC3953012
PMID: 24625959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.