1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 24;9(3):e91766. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091766. 
eCollection 2014.

A recombinant novirhabdovirus presenting at the surface the E Glycoprotein from 
West Nile Virus (WNV) is immunogenic and provides partial protection against 
lethal WNV challenge in BALB/c mice.

Nzonza A(1), Lecollinet S(2), Chat S(3), Lowenski S(2), Mérour E(1), Biacchesi 
S(1), Brémont M(1).

Author information:
(1)UR0892 Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires, INRA, CRJ, Jouy en 
Josas, France.
(2)UMR 1161 Virologie, INRA, ANSES, UPEC ENVA, Maisons-Alfort, France.
(3)UR1196 Unité Génomique et Physiologie de la Lactation, Plateau de Microscopie 
Électronique, INRA, CRJ, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

West Nile Virus (WNV) is a zoonotic mosquito-transmitted flavivirus that can 
infect and cause disease in mammals including humans. Our study aimed at 
developing a WNV vectored vaccine based on a fish Novirhabdovirus, the Viral 
Hemorrhagic Septicemia virus (VHSV). VHSV replicates at temperatures lower than 
20°C and is naturally inactivated at higher temperatures. A reverse genetics 
system has recently been developed in our laboratory for VHSV allowing the 
addition of genes in the viral genome and the recovery of the respective 
recombinant viruses (rVHSV). In this study, we have generated rVHSV vectors 
bearing the complete WNV envelope gene (EWNV) (rVHSV-EWNV) or fragments encoding 
E subdomains (either domain III alone or domain III fused to domain II) 
(rVHSV-DIIIWNV and rVHSV-DII-DIIIWNV, respectively) in the VHSV genome between 
the N and P cistrons. With the objective to enhance the targeting of the EWNV 
protein or EWNV-derived domains to the surface of VHSV virions, Novirhadovirus 
G-derived signal peptide and transmembrane domain (SPG and TMG) were fused to 
EWNV at its amino and carboxy termini, respectively. By Western-blot analysis, 
electron microscopy observations or inoculation experiments in mice, we 
demonstrated that both the EWNV and the DIIIWNV could be expressed at the viral 
surface of rVHSV upon addition of SPG. Every constructs expressing EWNV fused to 
SPG protected 40 to 50% of BALB/cJ mice against WNV lethal challenge and 
specifically rVHSV-SPGEWNV induced a neutralizing antibody response that 
correlated with protection. Surprisingly, rVHSV expressing EWNV-derived domain 
III or II and III were unable to protect mice against WNV challenge, although 
these domains were highly incorporated in the virion and expressed at the viral 
surface. In this study we demonstrated that a heterologous glycoprotein and non 
membrane-anchored protein, can be efficiently expressed at the surface of rVHSV 
making this approach attractive to develop new vaccines against various 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091766
PMCID: PMC3963854
PMID: 24663075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.