1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093541. 
eCollection 2014.

Generation and analysis of novel plant-derived antibody-based therapeutic 
molecules against West Nile virus.

He J(1), Lai H(1), Engle M(2), Gorlatov S(3), Gruber C(4), Steinkellner H(5), 
Diamond MS(6), Chen Q(7).

Author information:
(1)The Biodesign Institute and School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America.
(3)MacroGenics, Inc, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Natural Resources and Applied Life 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural 
Resources and Applied Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America; Department of Molecular Microbiology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States of 
America; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(7)The Biodesign Institute and School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America; College of Technology and 
Innovation, Arizona State University, Mesa, Arizona, United States of America.

Previously, our group engineered a plant-derived monoclonal antibody (MAb) 
(pHu-E16) that efficiently treated West Nile virus (WNV) infection in mice. In 
this study, we developed several pHu-E16 variants to improve its efficacy. These 
variants included a single-chain variable fragment (scFv) of pHu-E16 fused to 
the heavy chain (HC) constant domains (CH(1-3)) of human IgG 
(pHu-E16scFv-CH(1-3)) and a tetravalent molecule (Tetra pHu-E16) assembled from 
pHu-E16scFv-CH(1-3) with a second pHu-E16scFv fused to the light chain (LC) 
constant region. pHu-E16scFv-CH(1-3) and Tetra pHu-E16 were efficiently 
expressed and assembled in plants. To assess the impact of differences in 
N-linked glycosylation on pHu-E16 variant assembly and function, we expressed 
additional pHu-E16 variants with various combinations of HC and LC components. 
Our study revealed that proper pairing of HC and LC was essential for the 
complete N-glycan processing of antibodies in both plant and animal cells. 
Associated with their distinct N-glycoforms, pHu-E16, pHu-E16scFv-CH(1-3) and 
Tetra pHu-E16 exhibited differential binding to C1q and specific Fcγ receptors 
(FcγR). Notably, none of the plant-derived Hu-E16 variants showed 
antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) activity in CD32A+ human cells, suggesting 
the potential of plant-produced antibodies to minimize the adverse effect of 
ADE. Importantly, all plant-derived MAb variants exhibited at least equivalent 
in vitro neutralization and in vivo protection in mice compared to mammalian 
cell-produced Hu-E16. This study demonstrates the capacity of plants to express 
and assemble a large, complex and functional IgG-like tetravalent mAb variant 
and also provides insight into the relationship between MAb N-glycosylation, 
FcγR and C1q binding, and ADE. These new insights may allow the development of 
safer and cost effective MAb-based therapeutics for flaviviruses, and possibly 
other pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093541
PMCID: PMC3968140
PMID: 24675995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: S. Gorlatov is an employee 
of MacroGenics, Inc, which has licensed the WNV E16 antibody from Washington 
University for possible commercial development. Additionally, M. Diamond is a 
paid consultant for MacroGenics and owns equity in MacroGenics. These 
relationships do not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials. None of the other authors have a potential financial 
stake or conflict of interest associated with the publication of this work.