1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2014 Apr;14(4):261-71. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2013.1407. 
Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Use of envelope domain III protein for detection and differentiation of 
flaviviruses in the Free State Province, South Africa.

Mathengtheng L(1), Burt FJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Virology, University of the Free 
State/National Health Laboratory Services , Bloemfontein, Free State, South 
Africa .

The presence of the mosquito-borne flavivirus species West Nile virus (WNV) and 
Wesselsbron virus (WESSV) in southern Africa is well established; however, their 
true prevalence remains unknown. To date, the presence of tick-borne 
flaviviruses has not been confirmed in this region. Serological assays using 
reagents that can be handled in a biosafety level 2 or lower facility were 
developed and evaluated for the detection and differentiation of tick- and 
mosquito-borne flaviviruses in the Free State province of South Africa. A total 
of 2393 serum samples from a variety of species including humans, cattle, and 
sheep were tested using Kunjin virus (KUNV) cell lysate antigen for the 
detection of anti-flavivirus antibodies in an indirect immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
enzyme-linked immonosorbent assay (ELISA). To further differentiate positive 
reactors on the KUNV assay for antibodies against tick- or mosquito-borne 
flaviviruses, recombinant envelope domain III (r-EDIII) proteins of Langat virus 
(LGTV), WNV, and WESSV were expressed in a bacterial expression system and used 
in ELISA. A total of 722 samples were positive using the KUNV assay, of which 
71, 457, and 431 were positive using the r-LGTVEDIII, r-WNVEDIII, and 
r-WESSVEDIII assays, respectively. A total of 70 samples were reactive using the 
KUNV assay but not using any of the other assays, suggesting that there are 
possibly other flaviviruses circulating in the Free State province for which 
specific r-EDIII assays were not available. Collectively, the results suggest a 
strong presence of flaviviruses co-circulating in the Free State province with 
an abundance of mosquito-borne flaviviruses. There is evidence suggesting the 
presence of tick-borne flaviviruses, but it has yet to be confirmed. The EDIII 
protein is a useful tool that can be used in the detection and differentiation 
of flaviviruses in resource-limited laboratories, but virus neutralization 
assays are suggested for accurate confirmation of results.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2013.1407
PMID: 24689894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]