1. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(14):7828-42. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00196-14. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Specificities of human CD4+ T cell responses to an inactivated flavivirus 
vaccine and infection: correlation with structure and epitope prediction.

Schwaiger J(1), Aberle JH(1), Stiasny K(1), Knapp B(2), Schreiner W(3), Fae 
I(4), Fischer G(4), Scheinost O(5), Chmelik V(6), Heinz FX(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Statistics, Protein Informatics Group, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom Section of Biosimulation and Bioinformatics, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Section of Biosimulation and Bioinformatics, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Hospital České Budĕjovice, České 
Budĕjovice, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital České Budĕjovice, České 
Budĕjovice, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 
franz.x.heinz@meduniwien.ac.at.

Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) virus is endemic in large parts of Europe and 
Central and Eastern Asia and causes more than 10,000 annual cases of 
neurological disease in humans. It is closely related to the mosquito-borne 
yellow fever, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, and West Nile viruses, and 
vaccination with an inactivated whole-virus vaccine can effectively prevent 
clinical disease. Neutralizing antibodies are directed to the viral envelope 
protein (E) and an accepted correlate of immunity. However, data on the 
specificities of CD4(+) T cells that recognize epitopes in the viral structural 
proteins and thus can provide direct help to the B cells producing E-specific 
antibodies are lacking. We therefore conducted a study on the CD4(+) T cell 
response against the virion proteins in vaccinated people in comparison to TBE 
patients. The data obtained with overlapping peptides in interleukin-2 (IL-2) 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISpot) assays were analyzed in relation to 
the three-dimensional structures of the capsid (C) and E proteins as well as to 
epitope predictions based on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II 
peptide affinities. In the C protein, peptides corresponding to two out of four 
alpha helices dominated the response in both vaccinees and patients, whereas in 
the E protein concordance of immunodominance was restricted to peptides of a 
single domain (domain III). Epitope predictions were much better for C than for 
E and were especially erroneous for the transmembrane regions. Our data provide 
evidence for a strong impact of protein structural features that influence 
peptide processing, contributing to the discrepancies observed between 
experimentally determined and computer-predicted CD4(+) T cell epitopes. 
Importance: Tick-borne encephalitis virus is endemic in large parts of Europe 
and Asia and causes more than 10,000 annual cases of neurological disease in 
humans. It is closely related to yellow fever, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, 
and West Nile viruses, and vaccination with an inactivated vaccine can 
effectively prevent disease. Both vaccination and natural infection induce the 
formation of antibodies to a viral surface protein that neutralize the 
infectivity of the virus and mediate protection. B lymphocytes synthesizing 
these antibodies require help from other lymphocytes (helper T cells) which 
recognize small peptides derived from proteins contained in the viral particle. 
Which of these peptides dominate immune responses to vaccination and infection, 
however, was unknown. In our study we demonstrate which parts of the proteins 
contribute most strongly to the helper T cell response, highlight specific 
weaknesses of currently available approaches for their prediction, and 
demonstrate similarities and differences between vaccination and infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00196-14
PMCID: PMC4097808
PMID: 24789782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]