1. J Virol. 2014 Sep 1;88(17):9947-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01304-14. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

The West Nile virus-like flavivirus Koutango is highly virulent in mice due to 
delayed viral clearance and the induction of a poor neutralizing antibody 
response.

Prow NA(1), Setoh YX(2), Biron RM(2), Sester DP(2), Kim KS(3), Hobson-Peters 
J(2), Hall RA(2), Bielefeldt-Ohmann H(4).

Author information:
(1)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, 
The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia n.prow@uq.edu.au.
(2)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, 
The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia School of Veterinary Science, The University of 
Queensland, Gatton, Queensland, Australia.

The mosquito-borne West Nile virus (WNV) is responsible for outbreaks of viral 
encephalitis in humans, horses, and birds, with particularly virulent strains 
causing recent outbreaks of disease in eastern Europe, the Middle East, North 
America, and Australia. Previous studies have phylogenetically separated WNV 
strains into two main genetic lineages (I and II) containing virulent strains 
associated with neurological disease. Several WNV-like strains clustering 
outside these lineages have been identified and form an additional five proposed 
lineages. However, little is known about whether these strains have the 
potential to induce disease. In a comparative analysis with the highly virulent 
lineage I American strain (WNVNY99), the low-pathogenicity lineage II strain 
(B956), a benign Australian strain, Kunjin (WNVKUN), the African WNV-like 
Koutango virus (WNVKOU), and a WNV-like isolate from Sarawak, Malaysia 
(WNVSarawak), were assessed for neuroinvasive properties in a murine model and 
for their replication kinetics in vitro. While WNVNY99 replicated to the highest 
levels in vitro, in vivo mouse challenge revealed that WNVKOU was more virulent, 
with a shorter time to onset of neurological disease and higher morbidity. 
Histological analysis of WNVKOU- and WNVNY99-infected brain and spinal cords 
demonstrated more prominent meningoencephalitis and the presence of viral 
antigen in WNVKOU-infected mice. Enhanced virulence of WNVKOU also was 
associated with poor viral clearance in the periphery (sera and spleen), a 
skewed innate immune response, and poor neutralizing antibody development. These 
data demonstrate, for the first time, potent neuroinvasive and neurovirulent 
properties of a WNV-like virus outside lineages I and II.
IMPORTANCE: In this study, we characterized the in vitro and in vivo properties 
of previously uncharacterized West Nile virus strains and West Nile-like 
viruses. We identified a West Nile-like virus, Koutango virus (WNVKOU), that was 
more virulent than a known virulent lineage I virus, WNVNY99. The enhanced 
virulence of WNVKOU was associated with poor viral clearance and the induction 
of a poor neutralizing antibody response. These findings provide new insights 
into the pathogenesis of West Nile virus.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01304-14
PMCID: PMC4136322
PMID: 24942584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]