1. Virol J. 2014 Jun 19;11:115. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-115.

Identification of linear human B-cell epitopes of tick-borne encephalitis virus.

Kuivanen S(1), Hepojoki J, Vene S, Vaheri A, Vapalahti O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Haartman Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. suvi.kuivanen@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUND: Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a central nervous system infection 
transmitted to humans by ticks. The causative agent, tick-borne encephalitis 
virus (TBEV), belongs to the genus Flavivirus (family Flaviviridae), which 
includes globally important arthropod-borne viruses, such as dengue, Yellow 
fever, Japanese encephalitis and West Nile viruses. Flaviviruses are highly 
cross-reactive in serological tests that are currently based on viral envelope 
proteins. The envelope (E) protein is the major antigenic determinant and it is 
known to induce neutralizing antibody responses.
METHODS: We synthesized the full-length TBEV proteome as overlapping synthetic 
18-mer peptides to find dominant linear IgG epitopes. To distinguish natural 
TBEV infections from responses to TBE immunization or other flavivirus 
infections, the peptides were probed with sera of patients infected with TBEV, 
West Nile virus (WNV) or dengue virus (DENV), sera from TBE vaccinees and 
negative control sera by SPOT array technique.
RESULTS: We identified novel linear TBEV IgG epitopes in the E protein and in 
the nonstructural protein 5 (NS5).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we screened TBEV structural and nonstructural 
proteins to find linear epitopes specific for TBEV. We found 11 such epitopes 
and characterized specifically two of them to be potential for differential 
diagnostics. This is the first report of identifying dominant linear human 
B-cell epitopes of the whole TBEV genome. The identified peptide epitopes have 
potential as antigens for diagnosing TBEV and to serologically distinguish 
flavivirus infections from each other.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-115
PMCID: PMC4078944
PMID: 24946852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]