1. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jul 23;136(29):10315-24. doi: 10.1021/ja503318x. Epub 2014
 Jul 8.

Thermodynamic mechanism for the evasion of antibody neutralization in 
flaviviruses.

Maillard RA(1), Liu T, Beasley DW, Barrett AD, Hilser VJ, Lee JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, ‡Department of Microbiology & 
Immunology, §Department of Pathology, ∥Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, 
⊥Institute for Human Infections and Immunity and #Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University of Texas Medical Branch , 
Galveston, Texas 77555, United States.

Mutations in the epitopes of antigenic proteins can confer viral resistance to 
antibody-mediated neutralization. However, the fundamental properties that 
characterize epitope residues and how mutations affect antibody binding to alter 
virus susceptibility to neutralization remain largely unknown. To address these 
questions, we used an ensemble-based algorithm to characterize the effects of 
mutations on the thermodynamics of protein conformational fluctuations. We 
applied this method to the envelope protein domain III (ED3) of two medically 
important flaviviruses: West Nile and dengue 2. We determined an intimate 
relationship between the susceptibility of a residue to thermodynamic 
perturbations and epitope location. This relationship allows the successful 
identification of the primary epitopes in each ED3, despite their high sequence 
and structural similarity. Mutations that allow the ED3 to evade detection by 
the antibody either increase or decrease conformational fluctuations of the 
epitopes through local effects or long-range interactions. Spatially distant 
interactions originate in the redistribution of conformations of the ED3 
ensembles, not through a mechanically connected array of contiguous amino acids. 
These results reconcile previous observations of evasion of neutralization by 
mutations at a distance from the epitopes. Finally, we established a 
quantitative correlation between subtle changes in the conformational 
fluctuations of the epitope and large defects in antibody binding affinity. This 
correlation suggests that mutations that allow viral growth, while reducing 
neutralization, do not generate significant structural changes and underscores 
the importance of protein fluctuations and long-range interactions in the 
mechanism of antibody-mediated neutralization resistance.

DOI: 10.1021/ja503318x
PMCID: PMC4111217
PMID: 24950171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]