1. J Virol. 2014 Dec;88(23):13845-57. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02086-14. Epub 2014 Sep
24.

Variation of the specificity of the human antibody responses after tick-borne 
encephalitis virus infection and vaccination.

Jarmer J(1), Zlatkovic J(1), Tsouchnikas G(1), Vratskikh O(1), Strauß J(1), 
Aberle JH(1), Chmelik V(2), Kundi M(3), Stiasny K(1), Heinz FX(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Hospital Ceske Budejovice, Department of Infectious Diseases, Ceske 
Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Environmental Health, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(4)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 
franz.x.heinz@meduniwien.ac.at.

Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) virus is an important human-pathogenic flavivirus 
endemic in large parts of Europe and Central and Eastern Asia. Neutralizing 
antibodies specific for the viral envelope protein E are believed to mediate 
long-lasting protection after natural infection and vaccination. To study the 
specificity and individual variation of human antibody responses, we developed 
immunoassays with recombinant antigens representing viral surface protein 
domains and domain combinations. These allowed us to dissect and quantify 
antibody populations of different fine specificities in sera of TBE patients and 
vaccinees. Postinfection and postvaccination sera both displayed strong 
individual variation of antibody titers as well as the relative proportions of 
antibodies to different domains of E, indicating that the immunodominance 
patterns observed were strongly influenced by individual-specific factors. The 
contributions of these antibody populations to virus neutralization were 
quantified by serum depletion analyses and revealed a significantly biased 
pattern. Antibodies to domain III, in contrast to what was found in mouse 
immunization studies with TBE and other flaviviruses, did not play any role in 
the human neutralizing antibody response, which was dominated by antibodies to 
domains I and II. Importantly, most of the neutralizing activity could be 
depleted from sera by a dimeric soluble form of the E protein, which is the 
building block of the icosahedral herringbone-like shell of flaviviruses, 
suggesting that antibodies to more complex quaternary epitopes involving 
residues from adjacent dimers play only a minor role in the total response to 
natural infection and vaccination in humans.
IMPORTANCE: Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) virus is a close relative of yellow 
fever, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, and West Nile viruses and distributed in 
large parts of Europe and Central and Eastern Asia. Antibodies to the viral 
envelope protein E prevent viral attachment and entry into cells and thus 
mediate virus neutralization and protection from disease. However, the fine 
specificity and individual variation of neutralizing antibody responses are 
currently not known. We have therefore developed new in vitro assays for 
dissecting the antibody populations present in blood serum and determining their 
contribution to virus neutralization. In our analysis of human postinfection and 
postvaccination sera, we found an extensive variation of the antibody 
populations present in sera, indicating substantial influences of 
individual-specific factors that control the specificity of the antibody 
response. Our study provides new insights into the immune response to an 
important human pathogen that is of relevance for the design of novel vaccines.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02086-14
PMCID: PMC4248988
PMID: 25253341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]