1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Dec 12;7:586. doi: 10.1186/s13071-014-0586-3.

Role of enhanced vector transmission of a new West Nile virus strain in an 
outbreak of equine disease in Australia in 2011.

van den Hurk AF(1)(2), Hall-Mendelin S(3), Webb CE(4), Tan CS(5), Frentiu FD(6), 
Prow NA(7), Hall RA(8).

Author information:
(1)Virology, Public and Environmental Health, Forensic and Scientific Services, 
Department of Health, Queensland Government, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 
andrew.vandenhurk@health.qld.gov.au.
(2)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and 
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 
andrew.vandenhurk@health.qld.gov.au.
(3)Virology, Public and Environmental Health, Forensic and Scientific Services, 
Department of Health, Queensland Government, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 
sonja.hall-mendelin@health.qld.gov.au.
(4)Department of Medical Entomology, University of Sydney and Pathology West - 
ICPMR Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia. Cameron.Webb@health.nsw.gov.au.
(5)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and 
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 
s.tan5@uq.edu.au.
(6)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation and School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, Kelvin Grove, QLD, Australia. 
francesca.frentiu@qut.edu.au.
(7)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and 
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 
n.prow@uq.edu.au.
(8)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and 
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 
roy.hall@uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: In 2011, a variant of West Nile virus Kunjin strain (WNVKUN) caused 
an unprecedented epidemic of neurological disease in horses in southeast 
Australia, resulting in almost 1,000 cases and a 9% fatality rate. We 
investigated whether increased fitness of the virus in the primary vector, Culex 
annulirostris, and another potential vector, Culex australicus, contributed to 
the widespread nature of the outbreak.
METHODS: Mosquitoes were exposed to infectious blood meals containing either the 
virus strain responsible for the outbreak, designated WNVKUN2011, or WNVKUN2009, 
a strain of low virulence that is typical of historical strains of this virus. 
WNVKUN infection in mosquito samples was detected using a fixed cell culture 
enzyme immunoassay and a WNVKUN- specific monoclonal antibody. Probit analysis 
was used to determine mosquito susceptibility to infection. Infection, 
dissemination and transmission rates for selected days post-exposure were 
compared using Fisher's exact test. Virus titers in bodies and saliva 
expectorates were compared using t-tests.
RESULTS: There were few significant differences between the two virus strains in 
the susceptibility of Cx. annulirostris to infection, the kinetics of virus 
replication and the ability of this mosquito species to transmit either strain. 
Both strains were transmitted by Cx. annulirostris for the first time on day 5 
post-exposure. The highest transmission rates (proportion of mosquitoes with 
virus detected in saliva) observed were 68% for WNVKUN2011 on day 12 and 72% for 
WNVKUN2009 on day 14. On days 12 and 14 post-exposure, significantly more 
WNVKUN2011 than WNVKUN2009 was expectorated by infected mosquitoes. Infection, 
dissemination and transmission rates of the two strains were not significantly 
different in Culex australicus. However, transmission rates and the amount of 
virus expectorated were significantly lower in Cx. australicus than Cx. 
annulirostris.
CONCLUSIONS: The higher amount of WNVKUN2011 expectorated by infected mosquitoes 
may be an indication that this virus strain is transmitted more efficiently by 
Cx. annulirostris compared to other WNVKUN strains. Combined with other factors, 
such as a convergence of abundant mosquito and wading bird populations, and 
mammalian and avian feeding behaviour by Cx. annulirostris, this may have 
contributed to the scale of the 2011 equine epidemic.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-014-0586-3
PMCID: PMC4280035
PMID: 25499981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]