1. Am J Vet Res. 2015 Jan;76(1):92-100. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.76.1.92.

West Nile virus-specific immunoglobulin isotype responses in vaccinated and 
infected horses.

Khatibzadeh SM(1), Gold CB, Keggan AE, Perkins GA, Glaser AL, Dubovi EJ, Wagner 
B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853.

OBJECTIVE: To compare antibody responses of horses naturally infected with West 
Nile virus (WNV) and those vaccinated against WNV, to identify whether 
vaccination interferes with the ability to diagnose WNV infection, and to 
determine the duration of antibody responses after vaccination.
SAMPLE: Sera from horses naturally infected with WNV (n = 10) and adult 
WNV-naïve horses before and after vaccination with a live canarypox 
virus-vectored vaccine (7) or a killed virus vaccine (8).
PROCEDURES: An established WNV IgM capture ELISA was used to measure IgM 
responses. Newly developed capture ELISAs were used to measure responses of 8 
other WNV-specific immunoglobulin isotypes. A serum neutralization assay was 
used to determine anti-WNV antibody titers.
RESULTS: WNV-specific IgM responses were typically detected in the sera of 
WNV-infected horses but not in sera of horses vaccinated against WNV. Natural 
infection with and vaccination against WNV induced an immunoglobulin response 
that was primarily composed of IgG1. West Nile virus-specific IgG1 was detected 
in the sera of most horses 14 days after vaccination. Serum anti-WNV IgG1 and 
neutralizing antibody responses induced by the killed-virus vaccines were higher 
and lasted longer than did those induced by the live canarypox virus-vectored 
vaccine.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: On the basis of these findings, we recommend 
that horses be vaccinated against WNV annually near the beginning of mosquito 
season, that both IgM and IgG1 responses against WNV be measured to distinguish 
between natural infection and vaccination, and that a WNV IgG1 ELISA be used to 
monitor anti-WNV antibodies titers in vaccinated horses.

DOI: 10.2460/ajvr.76.1.92
PMCID: PMC10959050
PMID: 25535666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]