1. Immunome Res. 2011;7(3):2.

FLAVIdB: A data mining system for knowledge discovery in flaviviruses with 
direct applications in immunology and vaccinology.

Olsen LR(1), Zhang GL(2), Reinherz EL(3), Brusic V(4).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Vaccine Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of 
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Cancer Vaccine Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Cancer Vaccine Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Laboratory of Immunobiology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Cancer Vaccine Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: The flavivirus genus is unusually large, comprising more than 70 
species, of which more than half are known human pathogens. It includes a set of 
clinically relevant infectious agents such as dengue, West Nile, yellow fever, 
and Japanese encephalitis viruses. Although these pathogens have been studied 
extensively, safe and efficient vaccines lack for the majority of the 
flaviviruses.
RESULTS: We have assembled a database that combines antigenic data of 
flaviviruses, specialized analysis tools, and workflows for automated complex 
analyses focusing on applications in immunology and vaccinology. FLAVIdB 
contains 12,858 entries of flavivirus antigen sequences, 184 verified T-cell 
epitopes, 201 verified B-cell epitopes, and 4 representative molecular 
structures of the dengue virus envelope protein. FLAVIdB was assembled by 
collection, annotation, and integration of data from GenBank, GenPept, UniProt, 
IEDB, and PDB. The data were subject to extensive quality control (redundancy 
elimination, error detection, and vocabulary consolidation). Further annotation 
of selected functionally relevant features was performed by organizing 
information extracted from the literature. The database was incorporated into a 
web-accessible data mining system, combining specialized data analysis tools for 
integrated analysis of relevant data categories (protein sequences, 
macromolecular structures, and immune epitopes). The data mining system includes 
tools for variability and conservation analysis, T-cell epitope prediction, and 
characterization of neutralizing components of B-cell epitopes. FLAVIdB is 
accessible at cvc.dfci.harvard.edu/flavi/
CONCLUSION: FLAVIdB represents a new generation of databases in which data and 
tools are integrated into a data mining infrastructures specifically designed to 
aid rational vaccine design by discovery of vaccine targets.

PMCID: PMC4276368
PMID: 25544857

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.