1. J Virol. 2015 Aug;89(15):7970-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00938-15. Epub 2015 May 27.

Immunization with Immune Complexes Modulates the Fine Specificity of Antibody 
Responses to a Flavivirus Antigen.

Tsouchnikas G(1), Zlatkovic J(1), Jarmer J(1), Strauß J(1), Vratskikh O(1), 
Kundi M(2), Stiasny K(1), Heinz FX(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Environmental Health, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 
Franz.X.Heinz@meduniwien.ac.at.

The antibody response to proteins may be modulated by the presence of 
preexisting antigen-specific antibodies and the formation of immune complexes 
(ICs). Effects such as a general increase or decrease of the response as well as 
epitope-specific phenomena have been described. In this study, we investigated 
influences of IC immunization on the fine specificity of antibody responses in a 
structurally well-defined system, using the envelope (E) protein of tick-borne 
encephalitis (TBE) virus as an immunogen. TBE virus occurs in Europe and Asia 
and-together with the yellow fever, dengue, West Nile, and Japanese encephalitis 
viruses-represents one of the major human-pathogenic flaviviruses. Mice were 
immunized with a dimeric soluble form of E (sE) alone or in complex with 
monoclonal antibodies specific for each of the three domains of E, and the 
antibody response induced by these ICs was compared to that seen after 
immunization with sE alone. Immunoassays using recombinant domains and domain 
combinations of TBE virus sE as well as the distantly related West Nile virus sE 
allowed the dissection and quantification of antibody subsets present in 
postimmunization sera, thus generating fine-specificity patterns of the 
polyclonal responses. There were substantially different responses with two of 
the ICs, and the differences could be mechanistically related to (i) epitope 
shielding and (ii) antibody-mediated structural changes leading to dissociation 
of the sE dimer. The phenomena described may also be relevant for polyclonal 
responses upon secondary infections and/or booster immunizations and may affect 
antibody responses in an individual-specific way.
IMPORTANCE: Infections with flaviviruses such as yellow fever, dengue, Japanese 
encephalitis, West Nile, and tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) viruses pose 
substantial public health problems in different parts of the world. Antibodies 
to viral envelope protein E induced by natural infection or vaccination were 
shown to confer protection from disease. Such antibodies can target different 
epitopes in E protein, and the fine specificities of polyclonal responses can 
differ between individuals. We conducted a mouse immunization study with TBE E 
protein alone or complexed to monoclonal antibodies specific for each of the 
three protein domains. We demonstrated that phenomena such as epitope shielding 
and antibody-induced structural changes can profoundly influence the fine 
specificity of antibody responses to the same immunogen. The study thus provided 
important new information on the potential immunomodulatory role of preexisting 
antibodies in a flavivirus system that can be relevant for understanding 
individual-specific factors influencing antibody responses in sequential 
flavivirus infections and/or immunizations.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00938-15
PMCID: PMC4505641
PMID: 26018152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]