1. J Virol. 2015 Sep;89(17):8880-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00354-15. Epub 2015 Jun 17.

Biology of Zika Virus Infection in Human Skin Cells.

Hamel R(1), Dejarnac O(2), Wichit S(1), Ekchariyawat P(1), Neyret A(3), 
Luplertlop N(4), Perera-Lecoin M(1), Surasombatpattana P(5), Talignani L(1), 
Thomas F(1), Cao-Lormeau VM(6), Choumet V(7), Briant L(3), Desprès P(8), Amara 
A(2), Yssel H(9), Missé D(10).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire MIVEGEC, UMR 224 IRD/CNRS/UM, Montpellier, France.
(2)INSERM, U944, Laboratoire de Pathologie et Virologie Moléculaire, Paris, 
France.
(3)Centre d'Étude d'Agents Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé, CNRS-UMR 
5236/UM, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Pathology Department, Prince of Songkla University, Songkla, Thailand.
(6)Institut Louis Malardé, Papeete, Tahiti, French Polynesia.
(7)Environment and Infectious Risks Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(8)Département Infections et Epidémiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, and 
UMR PIMIT (I2T Team), Université de La Réunion, INSERM U1187, CNRS 9192, IRD 
249, GIP-CYROI, Saint Clotilde, La Réunion, France.
(9)Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, INSERM, U1135, Sorbonne 
Universités, UPMC, APHP Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(10)Laboratoire MIVEGEC, UMR 224 IRD/CNRS/UM, Montpellier, France 
dorothee.misse@ird.fr.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is an emerging arbovirus of the Flaviviridae family, which 
includes dengue, West Nile, yellow fever, and Japanese encephalitis viruses, 
that causes a mosquito-borne disease transmitted by the Aedes genus, with recent 
outbreaks in the South Pacific. Here we examine the importance of human skin in 
the entry of ZIKV and its contribution to the induction of antiviral immune 
responses. We show that human dermal fibroblasts, epidermal keratinocytes, and 
immature dendritic cells are permissive to the most recent ZIKV isolate, 
responsible for the epidemic in French Polynesia. Several entry and/or adhesion 
factors, including DC-SIGN, AXL, Tyro3, and, to a lesser extent, TIM-1, 
permitted ZIKV entry, with a major role for the TAM receptor AXL. The ZIKV 
permissiveness of human skin fibroblasts was confirmed by the use of a 
neutralizing antibody and specific RNA silencing. ZIKV induced the transcription 
of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), RIG-I, and MDA5, as well as several 
interferon-stimulated genes, including OAS2, ISG15, and MX1, characterized by 
strongly enhanced beta interferon gene expression. ZIKV was found to be 
sensitive to the antiviral effects of both type I and type II interferons. 
Finally, infection of skin fibroblasts resulted in the formation of 
autophagosomes, whose presence was associated with enhanced viral replication, 
as shown by the use of Torin 1, a chemical inducer of autophagy, and the 
specific autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine. The results presented herein 
permit us to gain further insight into the biology of ZIKV and to devise 
strategies aiming to interfere with the pathology caused by this emerging 
flavivirus.
IMPORTANCE: Zika virus (ZIKV) is an arbovirus belonging to the Flaviviridae 
family. Vector-mediated transmission of ZIKV is initiated when a blood-feeding 
female Aedes mosquito injects the virus into the skin of its mammalian host, 
followed by infection of permissive cells via specific receptors. Indeed, skin 
immune cells, including dermal fibroblasts, epidermal keratinocytes, and 
immature dendritic cells, were all found to be permissive to ZIKV infection. The 
results also show a major role for the phosphatidylserine receptor AXL as a ZIKV 
entry receptor and for cellular autophagy in enhancing ZIKV replication in 
permissive cells. ZIKV replication leads to activation of an antiviral innate 
immune response and the production of type I interferons in infected cells. 
Taken together, these results provide the first general insights into the 
interaction between ZIKV and its mammalian host.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00354-15
PMCID: PMC4524089
PMID: 26085147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]