1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Nov 13;9(11):e0004218. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004218. eCollection 2015 Nov.

Recombinant Envelope-Proteins with Mutations in the Conserved Fusion Loop Allow 
Specific Serological Diagnosis of Dengue-Infections.

Rockstroh A(1), Barzon L(2), Pacenti M(2), Palù G(2), Niedrig M(3), Ulbert S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and 
Immunology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus and a major international 
public health concern in many tropical and sub-tropical areas worldwide. DENV is 
divided into four major serotypes, and infection with one serotype leads to 
immunity against the same, but not the other serotypes. The specific diagnosis 
of DENV-infections via antibody-detection is problematic due to the high degree 
of cross-reactivity displayed by antibodies against related flaviviruses, such 
as West Nile virus (WNV), Yellow Fever virus (YFV) or Tick-borne encephalitis 
virus (TBEV). Especially in areas where several flaviviruses co-circulate or in 
the context of vaccination e.g. against YFV or TBEV, this severely complicates 
diagnosis and surveillance. Most flavivirus cross-reactive antibodies are 
produced against the highly conserved fusion loop (FL) domain in the viral 
envelope (E) protein. We generated insect-cell derived recombinant E-proteins of 
the four DENV-serotypes which contain point mutations in the FL domain. By using 
specific mixtures of these mutant antigens, cross-reactivity against 
heterologous flaviviruses was strongly reduced, enabling sensitive and specific 
diagnosis of the DENV-infected serum samples in IgG and IgM-measurements. These 
results have indications for the development of serological DENV-tests with 
improved specificity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004218
PMCID: PMC4643925
PMID: 26565964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: SU is author on a 
patent application which includes some of the proteins described in the study. 
This does not alter our adherence to all PLOS policies on sharing data and 
materials.