1. J Clin Microbiol. 2016 Feb;54(2):412-22. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02469-15. Epub 2015 
Dec 9.

Establishment of an Algorithm Using prM/E- and NS1-Specific IgM Antibody-Capture 
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays in Diagnosis of Japanese Encephalitis Virus 
and West Nile Virus Infections in Humans.

Galula JU(1), Chang GJ(2), Chuang ST(3), Chao DY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National 
Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National 
Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan stchuang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw 
dychao@nchu.edu.tw.
(4)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Public Health, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan 
stchuang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw dychao@nchu.edu.tw.

The front-line assay for the presumptive serodiagnosis of acute Japanese 
encephalitis virus (JEV) and West Nile virus (WNV) infections is the 
premembrane/envelope (prM/E)-specific IgM antibody-capture enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (MAC-ELISA). Due to antibody cross-reactivity, 
MAC-ELISA-positive samples may be confirmed with a time-consuming plaque 
reduction neutralization test (PRNT). In the present study, we applied a 
previously developed anti-nonstructural protein 1 (NS1)-specific MAC-ELISA 
(NS1-MAC-ELISA) on archived acute-phase serum specimens from patients with 
confirmed JEV and WNV infections and compared the results with prM/E containing 
virus-like particle-specific MAC-ELISA (VLP-MAC-ELISA). Paired-receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses revealed no statistical 
differences in the overall assay performances of the VLP- and NS1-MAC-ELISAs. 
The two methods had high sensitivities of 100% but slightly lower specificities 
that ranged between 80% and 100%. When the NS1-MAC-ELISA was used to confirm 
positive results in the VLP-MAC-ELISA, the specificity of serodiagnosis, 
especially for JEV infection, was increased to 90% when applied in areas where 
JEV cocirculates with WNV, or to 100% when applied in areas that were endemic 
for JEV. The results also showed that using multiple antigens could resolve the 
cross-reactivity in the assays. Significantly higher positive-to-negative (P/N) 
values were consistently obtained with the homologous antigens than those with 
the heterologous antigens. JEV or WNV was reliably identified as the currently 
infecting flavivirus by a higher ratio of JEV-to-WNV P/N values or vice versa. 
In summary of the above-described results, the diagnostic algorithm combining 
the use of multiantigen VLP- and NS1-MAC-ELISAs was developed and can be 
practically applied to obtain a more specific and reliable result for the 
serodiagnosis of JEV and WNV infections without the need for PRNT. The developed 
algorithm should provide great utility in diagnostic and surveillance activities 
in which test accuracy is of utmost importance for effective disease 
intervention.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02469-15
PMCID: PMC4733197
PMID: 26659204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]