1. J Virol. 2016 Apr 14;90(9):4757-4770. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02861-15. Print 2016
May.

Recovery of West Nile Virus Envelope Protein Domain III Chimeras with Altered 
Antigenicity and Mouse Virulence.

McAuley AJ(1)(2), Torres M(1), Plante JA(2)(3), Huang CY(4), Bente 
DA(1)(2)(5)(6), Beasley DWC(7)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(2)Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(4)Arbovirus Diseases Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(5)Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(6)Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA dwbeasle@utmb.edu.

Flaviviruses are positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses responsible for 
millions of human infections annually. The envelope (E) protein of flaviviruses 
comprises three structural domains, of which domain III (EIII) represents a 
discrete subunit. The EIII gene sequence typically encodes epitopes recognized 
by virus-specific, potently neutralizing antibodies, and EIII is believed to 
play a major role in receptor binding. In order to assess potential interactions 
between EIII and the remainder of the E protein and to assess the effects of 
EIII sequence substitutions on the antigenicity, growth, and virulence of a 
representative flavivirus, chimeric viruses were generated using the West Nile 
virus (WNV) infectious clone, into which EIIIs from nine flaviviruses with 
various levels of genetic diversity from WNV were substituted. Of the constructs 
tested, chimeras containing EIIIs from Koutango virus (KOUV), Japanese 
encephalitis virus (JEV), St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), and Bagaza virus 
(BAGV) were successfully recovered. Characterization of the chimeras in vitro 
and in vivo revealed differences in growth and virulence between the viruses, 
within vivo pathogenesis often not being correlated within vitro growth. Taken 
together, the data demonstrate that substitutions of EIII can allow the 
generation of viable chimeric viruses with significantly altered antigenicity 
and virulence.
IMPORTANCE: The envelope (E) glycoprotein is the major protein present on the 
surface of flavivirus virions and is responsible for mediating virus binding and 
entry into target cells. Several viable West Nile virus (WNV) variants with 
chimeric E proteins in which the putative receptor-binding domain (EIII) 
sequences of other mosquito-borne flaviviruses were substituted in place of the 
WNV EIII were recovered, although the substitution of several more divergent 
EIII sequences was not tolerated. The differences in virulence and tissue 
tropism observed with the chimeric viruses indicate a significant role for this 
sequence in determining the pathogenesis of the virus within the mammalian host. 
Our studies demonstrate that these chimeras are viable and suggest that such 
recombinant viruses may be useful for investigation of domain-specific antibody 
responses and the more extensive definition of the contributions of EIII to the 
tropism and pathogenesis of WNV or other flaviviruses.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02861-15
PMCID: PMC4836310
PMID: 26912625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]