1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016 Jun 3;65(21):543-6. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6521e1.

Interim Guidance for Interpretation of Zika Virus Antibody Test Results.

Rabe IB(1), Staples JE, Villanueva J, Hummel KB, Johnson JA, Rose L; MTS; Hills 
S, Wasley A, Fischer M, Powers AM.

Author information:
(1)Zika virus response epidemiology and laboratory teams, CDC.

Zika virus is a single-stranded RNA virus in the genus Flavivirus and is closely 
related to dengue, West Nile, Japanese encephalitis, and yellow fever viruses 
(1,2). Among flaviviruses, Zika and dengue virus share similar symptoms of 
infection, transmission cycles, and geographic distribution. Diagnostic testing 
for Zika virus infection can be accomplished using both molecular and serologic 
methods. For persons with suspected Zika virus disease, a positive real-time 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) result confirms Zika 
virus infection, but a negative rRT-PCR result does not exclude infection (3-7). 
In these cases, immunoglobulin (Ig) M and neutralizing antibody testing can 
identify additional recent Zika virus infections (6,7). However, Zika virus 
antibody test results can be difficult to interpret because of cross-reactivity 
with other flaviviruses, which can preclude identification of the specific 
infecting virus, especially when the person previously was infected with or 
vaccinated against a related flavivirus (8). This is important because the 
results of Zika and dengue virus testing will guide clinical management. 
Pregnant women with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection should be 
evaluated and managed for possible adverse pregnancy outcomes and be reported to 
the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry or the Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy 
Surveillance System for clinical follow-up (9,10). All patients with clinically 
suspected dengue should have proper management to reduce the risk for hemorrhage 
and shock (11). If serologic testing indicates recent flavivirus infection that 
could be caused by either Zika or dengue virus, patients should be clinically 
managed for both infections because they might have been infected with either 
virus.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6521e1
PMID: 27254248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]