1. Immunology. 2016 Dec;149(4):386-399. doi: 10.1111/imm.12656. Epub 2016 Sep 7.

From ZikV genome to vaccine: in silico approach for the epitope-based peptide 
vaccine against Zika virus envelope glycoprotein.

Alam A(1), Ali S(1), Ahamad S(2), Malik MZ(1), Ishrat R(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Science, Jamia Millia Islamia, 
New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, College of Engineering & Technology, IFTM, 
Moradabad, India.
(3)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Science, Jamia Millia Islamia, 
New Delhi, India. rishrat@jmi.ac.in.

Zika virus (ZikV) has emerged as a potential threat to human health worldwide. A 
member of the Flaviviridae, ZikV is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes. It is 
related to other pathogenic vector-borne flaviviruses including dengue, West 
Nile and Japanese encephalitis viruses, but produces a comparatively mild 
disease in humans. As a result of its epidemic outbreak and the lack of 
potential medication, there is a need for improved vaccine/drugs. Computational 
techniques will provide further information about this virus. Comparative 
analysis of ZikV genomes should lead to the identification of the core 
characteristics that define a virus family, as well as its unique properties, 
while phylogenetic analysis will show the evolutionary relationships and provide 
clues about the protein's ancestry. Envelope glycoprotein of ZikV was obtained 
from a protein database and the most immunogenic epitope for T cells and B cells 
involved in cell-mediated immunity, whereas B cells are primarily responsible 
for humoral immunity. We mainly focused on MHC class I potential peptides. 
YRIMLSVHG, VLIFLSTAV and MMLELDPPF, GLDFSDLYY are the most potent peptides 
predicted as epitopes for CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, respectively, whereas MMLELDPPF 
and GLDFSDLYY had the highest pMHC-I immunogenicity score and these are further 
tested for interaction against the HLA molecules, using in silico docking 
techniques to verify the binding cleft epitope. However, this is an introductory 
approach to design an epitope-based peptide vaccine against ZikV; we hope that 
this model will be helpful in designing and predicting novel vaccine candidates.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12656
PMCID: PMC5095496
PMID: 27485738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]