1. Vaccine. 2017 Jan 5;35(2):283-292. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.11.080. Epub
2016  Dec 3.

Pre-clinical development of a hydrogen peroxide-inactivated West Nile virus 
vaccine.

Poore EA(1), Slifka DK(1), Raué HP(2), Thomas A(2), Hammarlund E(2), Quintel 
BK(1), Torrey LL(1), Slifka AM(1), Richner JM(3), Dubois ME(1), Johnson LP(4), 
Diamond MS(5), Slifka MK(6), Amanna IJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Najít Technologies, Inc, Beaverton, OR, USA.
(2)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Department 
of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Beaverton, OR, USA.
(3)Departments of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(4)BioFinity Consulting, Beaverton, OR, USA.
(5)Departments of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA; Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA; Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; The Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy 
Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Najít Technologies, Inc, Beaverton, OR, USA; Division of Neuroscience, Oregon 
National Primate Research Center, Department of Molecular Microbiology and 
Immunology, Oregon Health & Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA.
(7)Najít Technologies, Inc, Beaverton, OR, USA. Electronic address: 
iamanna@najittech.com.

West Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquito-transmitted pathogen with a wide 
geographical range that can lead to long-term disability and death in some 
cases. Despite the public health risk posed by WNV, including an estimated 3 
million infections in the United States alone, no vaccine is available for use 
in humans. Here, we present a scaled manufacturing approach for production of a 
hydrogen peroxide-inactivated whole virion WNV vaccine, termed HydroVax-001WNV. 
Vaccination resulted in robust virus-specific neutralizing antibody responses 
and protection against WNV-associated mortality in mice or viremia in rhesus 
macaques (RM). A GLP-compliant toxicology study performed in rats demonstrated 
an excellent safety profile with clinical findings limited to minor and 
transient irritation at the injection site. An in vitro relative potency (IVRP) 
assay was developed and shown to correlate with in vivo responses following 
forced degradation studies. Long-term in vivo potency comparisons between the 
intended storage condition (2-8°C) and a thermally stressed condition (40±2°C) 
demonstrated no loss in vaccine efficacy or protective immunity over a 6-month 
span of time. Together, the positive pre-clinical findings regarding 
immunogenicity, safety, and stability indicate that HydroVax-001WNV is a 
promising vaccine candidate.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.11.080
PMCID: PMC5191926
PMID: 27919629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This potential individual and institutional 
conflict of interest has been reviewed and managed by OHSU. HPR, AT, JMR, and 
MSD declare no relevant conflicts of interest.