1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 25;12(7):e0181734. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181734. 
eCollection 2017.

DNA-immunisation with dengue virus E protein domains I/II, but not domain III, 
enhances Zika, West Nile and Yellow Fever virus infection.

Slon Campos JL(1), Poggianella M(1), Marchese S(1), Mossenta M(1), Rana J(1), 
Arnoldi F(1)(2), Bestagno M(1), Burrone OR(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.

Dengue virus (DENV), the causative agent of dengue disease, is among the most 
important mosquito-borne pathogens worldwide. DENV is composed of four closely 
related serotypes and belongs to the Flaviviridae family alongside other 
important arthropod-borne viral pathogens such as Zika virus (ZIKV), West Nile 
virus (WNV) and Yellow Fever virus (YFV). After infection, the antibody response 
is mostly directed to the viral E glycoprotein which is composed of three 
structural domains named DI, DII and DIII that share variable degrees of 
homology among different viruses. Recent evidence supports a close serological 
interaction between ZIKV and DENV. The possibility of worse clinical outcomes as 
a consequence of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection (ADE) due to 
cross-reactive antibodies with poor neutralisation activity is a matter of 
concern. We tested polyclonal sera from groups of female Balb/C mice vaccinated 
with DNA constructs expressing DI/DII, DIII or the whole sE from different DENV 
serotypes and compared their activity in terms of cross-reactivity, 
neutralisation of virus infection and ADE. Our results indicate that the 
polyclonal antibody responses against the whole sE protein are highly 
cross-reactive with strong ADE and poor neutralisation activities due to DI/DII 
immunodominance. Conversely, anti-DIII polyclonal antibodies are type-specific, 
with no ADE towards ZIKV, WNV and YFV, and strong neutralisation activity 
restricted only to DENV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181734
PMCID: PMC5526558
PMID: 28742857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: I have read the journal's 
policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing 
interests: A patent (Italian patent RM2013A000458 “Antidengue virus genetic 
vaccine based on the envelope protein ectodomains”) on the invention of the 
antigen construct for DNA vaccination has been filed by MP, MB, and ORB. This 
does not alter our adherence to all PLOS policies on sharing data and materials.