1. J Virol. 2017 Sep 27;91(20):e00834-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00834-17. Print 2017
Oct  15.

Development of Virus-Like-Particle Vaccine and Reporter Assay for Zika Virus.

Garg H(1), Sedano M(2), Plata G(2), Punke EB(2), Joshi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Emphasis in Infectious Diseases, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, Texas, USA 
himanshu.garg@ttuhsc.edu anjali.joshi@ttuhsc.edu.
(2)Center of Emphasis in Infectious Diseases, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, Texas, USA.

Recent worldwide outbreaks of Zika virus (ZIKV) infection and the lack of an 
approved vaccine raise serious concerns regarding preparedness to combat this 
emerging virus. We used a virus-like particle (VLP)-based approach to develop a 
vaccine and a microneutralization assay for ZIKV. A synthetic 
capsid-premembrane-envelope (C-prM-E) gene construct of ZIKV was used to 
generate reporter virus particles (RVPs) that package a green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) reporter-expressing West Nile virus (WNV) replicon. The assay was 
adapted to a 96-well format, similar to the plaque reduction neutralization test 
(PRNT), and showed high reproducibility with specific detection of ZIKV 
neutralizing antibodies. Furthermore, C-prM-E and prM-E VLPs were tested as 
vaccine candidates in mice and compared to DNA vaccination. While the ZIKV prM-E 
construct alone was sufficient for generating VLPs, efficient VLP production 
from the C-prM-E construct could be achieved in the presence of the WNV NS2B-3 
protease, which cleaves C from prM, allowing virus release. Immunization studies 
in mice showed that VLPs generated higher neutralizing antibody titers than 
those with the DNA vaccines, with C-prM-E VLPs giving slightly higher titers 
than those with prM-E VLPs. The superiority of C-prM-E VLPs suggests that 
inclusion of capsid may have benefits for ZIKV and other flaviviral VLP 
vaccines. To facilitate the VLP platform, we generated a stable cell line 
expressing high levels of ZIKV prM-E proteins that constitutively produce VLPs 
as well as a cell line expressing ZIKV C-prM-E proteins for RVP production. 
While several vaccine platforms have been proposed for ZIKV, this study 
describes a safe, effective, and economical VLP-based vaccine against 
ZIKV.IMPORTANCE To address the growing Zika virus epidemic, we undertook this 
study with two objectives: first, to develop a safe, effective, and economical 
vaccine for ZIKV, and second, to develop a rapid and versatile assay to detect 
the anti-ZIKV immune response. We generated a cell line stably expressing ZIKV 
prM-E that produces large amounts of VLPs in the supernatant and a ZIKV C-prM-E 
cell line that produces reporter virus particles upon transfection with a GFP 
replicon plasmid. The prM-E VLPs induced a strong neutralizing antibody response 
in mice that was better when the capsid was included. VLP-based vaccines showed 
significantly better neutralizing antibody responses than those with their DNA 
counterparts. The RVP-based microneutralization assay worked similarly to the 
PRNT assay, with a rapid GFP readout in a 96-well format. Our VLP-based platform 
provides a source for a ZIKV vaccine and diagnosis that can rapidly be adapted 
to current outbreaks.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00834-17
PMCID: PMC5625514
PMID: 28794019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]