1. J Virol. 2017 Nov 14;91(23):e01181-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01181-17. Print 2017
Dec  1.

An Envelope-Modified Tetravalent Dengue Virus-Like-Particle Vaccine Has 
Implications for Flavivirus Vaccine Design.

Urakami A(1), Ngwe Tun MM(2), Moi ML(2), Sakurai A(1), Ishikawa M(1), Kuno S(1), 
Ueno R(1), Morita K(2), Akahata W(3).

Author information:
(1)VLP Therapeutics, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Virology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, 
Nagasaki, Japan.
(3)VLP Therapeutics, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA wakahata@vlptherapeutics.com.

Dengue viruses (DENV) infect 50 to 100 million people each year. The spread of 
DENV-associated infections is one of the most serious public health problems 
worldwide, as there is no widely available vaccine or specific therapeutic for 
DENV infections. To address this, we developed a novel tetravalent dengue 
vaccine by utilizing virus-like particles (VLPs). We created recombinant DENV1 
to -4 (DENV1-4) VLPs by coexpressing precursor membrane (prM) and envelope (E) 
proteins, with an F108A mutation in the fusion loop structure of E to increase 
the production of VLPs in mammalian cells. Immunization with DENV1-4 VLPs as 
individual, monovalent vaccines elicited strong neutralization activity against 
each DENV serotype in mice. For use as a tetravalent vaccine, DENV1-4 VLPs 
elicited high levels of neutralization activity against all four serotypes 
simultaneously. The neutralization antibody responses induced by the VLPs were 
significantly higher than those with DNA or recombinant E protein immunization. 
Moreover, antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) was not observed against any 
serotype at a 1:10 serum dilution. We also demonstrated that the Zika virus 
(ZIKV) VLP production level was enhanced by introducing the same F108A mutation 
into the ZIKV envelope protein. Taken together, these results suggest that our 
strategy for DENV VLP production is applicable to other flavivirus VLP vaccine 
development, due to the similarity in viral structures, and they describe the 
promising development of an effective tetravalent vaccine against the prevalent 
flavivirus.IMPORTANCE Dengue virus poses one of the most serious public health 
problems worldwide, and the incidence of diseases caused by the virus has 
increased dramatically. Despite decades of effort, there is no effective 
treatment against dengue. A safe and potent vaccine against dengue is still 
needed. We developed a novel tetravalent dengue vaccine by using virus-like 
particles (VLPs), which are noninfectious because they lack the viral genome. 
Previous attempts of other groups to use dengue VLPs resulted in generally poor 
yields. We found that a critical amino acid mutation in the envelope protein 
enhances the production of VLPs. Our tetravalent vaccine elicited potent 
neutralizing antibody responses against all four DENV serotypes. Our findings 
can also be applied to vaccine development against other flaviviruses, such as 
Zika virus or West Nile virus.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01181-17
PMCID: PMC5686733
PMID: 28956764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]