1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2017 Dec;17(12):825-835. doi:
10.1089/vbz.2017.2172.  Epub 2017 Oct 30.

Differential Diagnosis of Flavivirus Infections in Horses Using Viral Envelope 
Protein Domain III Antigens in Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay.

Piyasena TBH(1), Setoh YX(1), Hobson-Peters J(1), Prow NA(1), Bielefeldt-Ohmann 
H(1)(2), Khromykh AA(1), Perera D(3), Cardosa MJ(3), Kirkland PD(4), Hall RA(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, School of Chemistry and 
Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland , St Lucia, Australia .
(2)2 School of Veterinary Science, University of Queensland , Gatton, Australia 
.
(3)3 Institute of Health & Community Medicine , Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, 
Kota Samarahan, Malaysia .
(4)4 Virology Laboratory, Department of Primary Industries, Elizabeth Macarthur 
Agricultural Institute , Menangle, Australia .

In Australia, infection of horses with the West Nile virus (WNV) or Murray 
Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV) occasionally results in severe neurological 
disease that cannot be clinically differentiated. Confirmatory serological tests 
to detect antibody specific for MVEV or WNV in horses are often hampered by 
cross-reactive antibodies induced to conserved epitopes on the envelope (E) 
protein. This study utilized bacterially expressed recombinant antigens derived 
from domain III of the E protein (rE-DIII) of MVEV and WNV, respectively, to 
determine whether these subunit antigens provided specific diagnostic markers of 
infection with these two viruses. When a panel of 130 serum samples, from horses 
with known flavivirus infection status, was tested in enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using rE-DIII antigens, a differential diagnosis of 
MVEV or WNV was achieved for most samples. Time-point samples from horses 
exposed to flavivirus infection during the 2011 outbreak of equine encephalitis 
in south-eastern Australia also indicated that the rE-DIII antigens were capable 
of detecting and differentiating MVEV and WNV infection in convalescent sera 
with similar sensitivity and specificity to virus neutralization tests and 
blocking ELISAs. Overall, these results indicate that the rE-DIII is a suitable 
antigen for use in rapid immunoassays for confirming MVEV and WNV infections in 
horses in the Australian context and warrant further assessment on sensitive, 
high-throughput serological platforms such as multiplex immune assays.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2172
PMID: 29083957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]