1. J Virol. 2018 Mar 14;92(7):e01868-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01868-17. Print 2018
Apr  1.

Structural Study of the C-Terminal Domain of Nonstructural Protein 1 from 
Japanese Encephalitis Virus.

Poonsiri T(1)(2), Wright GSA(1), Diamond MS(3)(4)(5), Turtle L(6)(2), Solomon 
T(2), Antonyuk SV(7).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Group, Institute of Integrative Biology, Faculty of 
Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Health Protection Research Unit on Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, 
Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Centre for Global Vaccine Research, Institute of Infection and Global Health, 
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)Molecular Biophysics Group, Institute of Integrative Biology, Faculty of 
Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom 
S.Antonyuk@liverpool.ac.uk.

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a mosquito-transmitted flavivirus that is 
closely related to other emerging viral pathogens, including dengue virus 
(DENV), West Nile virus (WNV), and Zika virus (ZIKV). JEV infection can result 
in meningitis and encephalitis, which in severe cases cause permanent brain 
damage and death. JEV occurs predominantly in rural areas throughout Southeast 
Asia, the Pacific Islands, and the Far East, causing around 68,000 cases of 
infection worldwide each year. In this report, we present a 2.1-Å-resolution 
crystal structure of the C-terminal β-ladder domain of JEV nonstructural protein 
1 (NS1-C). The surface charge distribution of JEV NS1-C is similar to those of 
WNV and ZIKV but differs from that of DENV. Analysis of the JEV NS1-C structure, 
with in silico molecular dynamics simulation and experimental solution 
small-angle X-ray scattering, indicates extensive loop flexibility on the 
exterior of the protein. This, together with the surface charge distribution, 
indicates that flexibility influences the protein-protein interactions that 
govern pathogenicity. These factors also affect the interaction of NS1 with the 
22NS1 monoclonal antibody, which is protective against West Nile virus 
infection. Liposome and heparin binding assays indicate that only the N-terminal 
region of NS1 mediates interaction with membranes and that sulfate binding sites 
common to NS1 structures are not glycosaminoglycan binding interfaces. This 
report highlights several differences between flavivirus NS1 proteins and 
contributes to our understanding of their structure-pathogenic function 
relationships.IMPORTANCE JEV is a major cause of viral encephalitis in Asia. 
Despite extensive vaccination, epidemics still occur. Nonstructural protein 1 
(NS1) plays a role in viral replication, and, because it is secreted, it can 
exhibit a wide range of interactions with host proteins. NS1 sequence and 
protein folds are conserved within the Flavivirus genus, but variations in NS1 
protein-protein interactions among viruses likely contribute to differences in 
pathogenesis. Here, we compared characteristics of the C-terminal β-ladder 
domain of NS1 between flaviviruses, including surface charge, loop flexibility, 
epitope cross-reactivity, membrane adherence, and glycosaminoglycan binding. 
These structural features are central to NS1 functionality and may provide 
insight into the development of diagnostic tests and therapeutics.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01868-17
PMCID: PMC5972899
PMID: 29343583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]