1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Feb 15;12(2):e0006302. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006302. eCollection 2018 Feb.

West Nile and St. Louis encephalitis viral genetic determinants of avian host 
competence.

Maharaj PD(1)(2), Bosco-Lauth AM(1)(3), Langevin SA(2), Anishchenko M(1)(2), 
Bowen RA(3), Reisen WK(2), Brault AC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Arboviral Disease Branch, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of 
America.
(2)Center for Vectorborne Disease Research and Department of Pathology, 
Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, United States of America.

West Nile virus (WNV) and St. Louis encephalitis (SLEV) virus are enzootically 
maintained in North America in cycles involving the same mosquito vectors and 
similar avian hosts. However, these viruses exhibit dissimilar viremia and 
virulence phenotypes in birds: WNV is associated with high magnitude viremias 
that can result in mortality in certain species such as American crows (AMCRs, 
Corvus brachyrhynchos) whereas SLEV infection yields lower viremias that have 
not been associated with avian mortality. Cross-neutralization of these viruses 
in avian sera has been proposed to explain the reduced circulation of SLEV since 
the introduction of WNV in North America; however, in 2015, both viruses were 
the etiologic agents of concurrent human encephalitis outbreaks in Arizona, 
indicating the need to re-evaluate host factors and cross-neutralization 
responses as factors potentially affecting viral co-circulation. Reciprocal 
chimeric WNV and SLEV viruses were constructed by interchanging the pre-membrane 
(prM)-envelope (E) genes, and viruses subsequently generated were utilized 
herein for the inoculation of three different avian species: house sparrows 
(HOSPs; Passer domesticus), house finches (Haemorhous mexicanus) and AMCRs. 
Cross-protective immunity between parental and chimeric viruses were also 
assessed in HOSPs. Results indicated that the prM-E genes did not modulate avian 
replication or virulence differences between WNV and SLEV in any of the three 
avian species. However, WNV-prME proteins did dictate cross-protective immunity 
between these antigenically heterologous viruses. Our data provides further 
evidence of the important role that the WNV / SLEV viral non-structural genetic 
elements play in viral replication, avian host competence and virulence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006302
PMCID: PMC5831645
PMID: 29447156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.