1. Vaccine. 2018 Mar 27;36(14):1846-1852. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.02.073.
Epub  2018 Feb 26.

A plant-produced vaccine protects mice against lethal West Nile virus infection 
without enhancing Zika or dengue virus infectivity.

Lai H(1), Paul AM(2), Sun H(1), He J(1), Yang M(1), Bai F(2), Chen Q(3).

Author information:
(1)The Biodesign Institute and School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern Mississippi, 
Hattiesburg, MS 39406, USA.
(3)The Biodesign Institute and School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. Electronic address: qiang.chen.4@asu.edu.

West Nile virus (WNV) has caused multiple global outbreaks with increased 
frequency of neuroinvasive disease in recent years. Despite many years of 
research, there are no licensed therapeutics or vaccines available for human 
use. One of the major impediments of vaccine development against WNV is the 
potential enhancement of infection by related flaviviruses in vaccinated 
subjects through the mechanism of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection 
(ADE). For instance, the recent finding of enhancement of Zika virus (ZIKV) 
infection by pre-exposure to WNV further complicates the development of WNV 
vaccines. Epidemics of WNV and the potential risk of ADE by current vaccine 
candidates demand the development of effective and safe vaccines. We have 
previously reported that the domain III (DIII) of the WNV envelope protein can 
be readily expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves, purified to homogeneity, 
and promote antigen-specific antibody response in mice. Herein, we further 
investigated the in vivo potency of a plant-made DIII (plant-DIII) in providing 
protective immunity against WNV infection. Furthermore, we examined if 
vaccination with plant-DIII would enhance the risk of a subsequent infection by 
ZIKV and Dengue virus (DENV). Plant-DIII vaccination evoked antigen-specific 
cellular immune responses as well as humoral responses. DIII-specific antibodies 
were neutralizing and the neutralization titers met the threshold correlated 
with protective immunity by vaccines against multiple flaviviruses. Furthermore, 
passive administration of anti-plant DIII mouse serum provided full protection 
against a lethal challenge of WNV infection in mice. Notably, plant DIII-induced 
antibodies did not enhance ZIKV and DENV infection in Fc gamma 
receptor-expressing cells, addressing the concern of WNV vaccines in inducing 
cross-reactive antibodies and sensitizing subjects to subsequent infection by 
heterologous flavivirus. This study provides the first report of a WNV subunit 
vaccine that induces protective immunity, while circumventing induction of 
antibodies with enhancing activity for ZIKV and DENV infection.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.02.073
PMCID: PMC5851867
PMID: 29490880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article.