1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2018 Aug;65(5):505-511. doi: 10.1111/zph.12460. Epub 
2018 Mar 25.

Serological evidence of widespread exposure of Grenada fruit bats to chikungunya 
virus.

Stone D(1), Lyons AC(2)(3), Huang YS(2)(3), Vanlandingham DL(2)(3), Higgs 
S(2)(3), Blitvich BJ(4), Adesiyun AA(5), Santana SE(6), Leiser-Miller L(6), 
Cheetham S(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, St. George's University, St. 
George, Grenada.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas 
State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.
(3)Biosecurity Research Institute, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(5)Department of Basic Veterinary Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago.
(6)Department of Biology and Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Antibody detection against selected potentially zoonotic vector-borne 
alphaviruses and flaviviruses was conducted on sera from bats from all six 
parishes in Grenada, West Indies. Sera were tested for (i) antibodies to 
flaviviruses West Nile virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus, Ilhéus virus, 
Bussuquara virus (BSQV), Rio Bravo virus and all four serotypes of dengue virus 
(DENV) by plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT); (ii) antibodies to 
alphaviruses western equine encephalitis virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis 
virus and eastern equine encephalitis virus by epitope-blocking enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA); and (iii) antibodies to the alphavirus chikungunya 
(CHIKV) by PRNT. Two species of fruit bats were sampled, Artibeus jamaicensis 
and Artibeus lituratus, all roosting in or within 1,000 m of human settlements. 
Fifteen (36%) of the 42 bats tested for neutralizing antibodies to CHIKV were 
positive. The CHIKV-seropositive bats lived in localities spanning five of the 
six parishes. All 43 bats tested for epitope-blocking ELISA antibody to the 
other alphaviruses were negative, except one positive for Venezuelan equine 
encephalitis virus. All 50 bats tested for neutralizing antibody to flaviviruses 
were negative, except one that had a BSQV PRNT80 titre of 20. The CHIKV serology 
results indicate that bats living close to and within human settlements were 
exposed to CHIKV in multiple locations. Importantly, bats for this study were 
trapped a year after the introduction and peak of the human CHIKV epidemic in 
Grenada. Thus, our data indicate that bats were exposed to CHIKV possibly during 
a time of marked decline in human cases.

© 2018 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12460
PMCID: PMC7165682
PMID: 29575672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.