1. J Virol. 2018 Aug 16;92(17):e00701-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00701-18. Print 2018
Sep  1.

Zika Virus Attenuation by Codon Pair Deoptimization Induces Sterilizing Immunity 
in Mouse Models.

Li P(1)(2), Ke X(1), Wang T(1)(3), Tan Z(1), Luo D(1), Miao Y(1), Sun J(1), 
Zhang Y(1), Liu Y(1), Hu Q(4), Xu F(3), Wang H(5), Zheng Z(5).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Center for Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic and Molecular Physics, 
Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems, Wuhan Center for 
Magnetic Resonance, Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Center for Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Wuhan, People's Republic of China wanghz@wh.iov.cn zhengzh@wh.iov.cn.

Zika virus (ZIKV) infection during the large epidemics in the Americas is 
related to congenital abnormities or fetal demise. To date, there is no vaccine, 
antiviral drug, or other modality available to prevent or treat Zika virus 
infection. Here we designed novel live attenuated ZIKV vaccine candidates using 
a codon pair deoptimization strategy. Three codon pair-deoptimized ZIKVs (Min E, 
Min NS1, and Min E+NS1) were de novo synthesized and recovered by reverse 
genetics and contained large amounts of underrepresented codon pairs in the E 
gene and/or NS1 gene. The amino acid sequence was 100% unchanged. The codon 
pair-deoptimized variants had decreased replication fitness in Vero cells (Min 
NS1 ≫ Min E > Min E+NS1), replicated more efficiently in insect cells than in 
mammalian cells, and demonstrated diminished virulence in a mouse model. In 
particular, Min E+NS1, the most restrictive variant, induced sterilizing 
immunity with a robust neutralizing antibody titer, and a single immunization 
achieved complete protection against lethal challenge and vertical ZIKV 
transmission during pregnancy. More importantly, due to the numerous synonymous 
substitutions in the codon pair-deoptimized strains, reversion to wild-type 
virulence through gradual nucleotide sequence mutations is unlikely. Our results 
collectively demonstrate that ZIKV can be effectively attenuated by codon pair 
deoptimization, highlighting the potential of Min E+NS1 as a safe vaccine 
candidate to prevent ZIKV infections.IMPORTANCE Due to unprecedented epidemics 
of Zika virus (ZIKV) across the Americas and the unexpected clinical symptoms, 
including Guillain-Barré syndrome, microcephaly, and other birth defects in 
humans, there is an urgent need for ZIKV vaccine development. Here we provided 
the first attenuated versions of ZIKV with two important genes (E and/or NS1) 
that were subjected to codon pair deoptimization. Compared to parental ZIKV, the 
codon pair-deoptimized ZIKVs were mammal attenuated and preferred insect to 
mammalian cells. Min E+NS1, the most restrictive variant, induced sterilizing 
immunity with a robust neutralizing antibody titer and achieved complete 
protection against lethal challenge and vertical virus transmission during 
pregnancy. More importantly, the massive synonymous mutational approach made it 
impossible for the variant to revert to wild-type virulence. Our results have 
proven the feasibility of codon pair deoptimization as a strategy to develop 
live attenuated vaccine candidates against flaviviruses such as ZIKV, Japanese 
encephalitis virus, and West Nile virus.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00701-18
PMCID: PMC6096834
PMID: 29925661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]