1. J Virol Methods. 2018 Oct;260:41-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2018.06.016. Epub
 2018 Jun 26.

A monoclonal antibody to DIII E protein allowing the differentiation of West 
Nile virus from other flaviviruses by a lateral flow assay.

Rebollo B(1), Pérez T(2), Camuñas A(2), Pérez-Ramírez E(3), Llorente F(3), 
Sánchez-Seco MP(4), Jiménez-Clavero MÁ(5), Venteo Á(2).

Author information:
(1)Inmunología y Genética Aplicada S.A. (INGENASA), Madrid, Spain. Electronic 
address: brebollo@ingenasa.com.
(2)Inmunología y Genética Aplicada S.A. (INGENASA), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria 
-Centro de Investigación en Sanidad Animal- (INIA-CISA), Valdeolmos, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Centro Nacional de Microbiología, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria 
-Centro de Investigación en Sanidad Animal- (INIA-CISA), Valdeolmos, Madrid, 
Spain; CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Spain.

West Nile Virus (WNV) belongs to the Flaviviridae family, genus Flavivirus, 
which includes other emerging arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) pathogenic 
for animals and/or humans. West Nile Virus is a genetically diverse RNA virus 
with at least 7 different recognized lineages. Following its recent introduction 
and subsequent expansion to the Americas, WNV is currently one of the most 
widely spread arboviruses in the world having recently re-emerged in the 
Mediterranean basin, Central and Eastern Europe. Laboratory tests are essential 
to confirm WNV infection and monoclonal antibodies represent useful tools for 
the development of diagnostic assays. A monoclonal antibody, 1D11, recognizing 
an epitope in the domain III of the envelope glycoprotein of WNV, was selected 
for this study. Its suitability to detect a range of WNV variants representative 
of its whole genetic range, and to differentiate it from other flaviviruses and 
arboviruses, was assessed by means of an immunochromatographic assay in an LFA 
format. A panel of cell culture supernatants infected with 9 different WNV 
isolates representing a wide range of genetic lineages, and 16 non-WNV 
arboviruses, including flaviviruses closely related to WNV, were tested. The mAb 
correctly detected all WNV strains, and did not react with any of the non-WNV 
arboviruses.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2018.06.016
PMID: 29958922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]