1. Nat Microbiol. 2019 Jan;4(1):71-77. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0283-7. Epub 2018 
Nov 19.

A protective human monoclonal antibody targeting the West Nile virus E protein 
preferentially recognizes mature virions.

Goo L(1)(2), Debbink K(1), Kose N(3), Sapparapu G(4), Doyle MP(5), Wessel AW(6), 
Richner JM(6)(7), Burgomaster KE(1), Larman BC(1), Dowd KA(1), Diamond MS(6), 
Crowe JE Jr(8), Pierson TC(9).

Author information:
(1)Viral Pathogenesis Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, and the Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(5)Department of Pathobiology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(6)Departments of Medicine, Molecular Microbiology, Pathology and Immunology, 
and The Andrew M. and Jane M. Bursky Center for Human Immunology and 
Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics, Pathobiology, Microbiology and Immunology, and the 
Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA. james.crowe@vanderbilt.edu.
(9)Viral Pathogenesis Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
piersontc@niaid.nih.gov.

West Nile virus (WNV), a member of the Flavivirus genus, is a leading cause of 
viral encephalitis in the United States1. The development of neutralizing 
antibodies against the flavivirus envelope (E) protein is critical for immunity 
and vaccine protection2. Previously identified candidate therapeutic mouse and 
human neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) target epitopes within the E 
domain III lateral ridge and the domain I-II hinge region, respectively3. To 
explore the neutralizing antibody repertoire elicited by WNV infection for 
potential therapeutic application, we isolated ten mAbs from WNV-infected 
individuals. mAb WNV-86 neutralized WNV with a 50% inhibitory concentration of 
2 ng ml-1, one of the most potently neutralizing flavivirus-specific antibodies 
ever isolated. WNV-86 targets an epitope in E domain II, and preferentially 
recognizes mature virions lacking an uncleaved form of the chaperone protein 
prM, unlike most flavivirus-specific antibodies4. In vitro selection experiments 
revealed a neutralization escape mechanism involving a glycan addition to E 
domain II. Finally, a single dose of WNV-86 administered two days post-infection 
protected mice from lethal WNV challenge. This study identifies a highly potent 
human neutralizing mAb with therapeutic potential that targets an epitope 
preferentially displayed on mature virions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-018-0283-7
PMCID: PMC6435290
PMID: 30455471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS M.S.D. is a consultant for 
Inbios and Sanofi-Pasteur and is on the Scientific Advisory Board of Moderna. 
J.E.C. has served as a consultant for Takeda Vaccines, Sanofi Pasteur, Pfizer, 
and Novavax, is on the Scientific Advisory Boards of CompuVax, GigaGen, Meissa 
Vaccines, PaxVax, and is Founder of IDBiologics.