1. Vaccine. 2019 Jul 9;37(30):4214-4221. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.12.020. Epub
 2018 Dec 31.

Advanced oxidation technology for the development of a next-generation 
inactivated West Nile virus vaccine.

Quintel BK(1), Thomas A(2), Poer DeRaad DE(1), Slifka MK(2), Amanna IJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Najít Technologies, Inc., Beaverton, OR, USA.
(2)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Department 
of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Beaverton, OR, USA.
(3)Najít Technologies, Inc., Beaverton, OR, USA. Electronic address: 
iamanna@najittech.com.

West Nile virus (WNV) is the most frequent mosquito-borne disease reported in 
the continental United States and although an effective veterinary vaccine 
exists for horses, there is still no commercial vaccine approved for human use. 
We have previously tested a 3% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-based WNV inactivation 
approach termed, HydroVax, in Phase I clinical trials and the vaccine was found 
to be safe and modestly immunogenic. Here, we describe an advanced, 
next-generation oxidation approach (HydroVax-II) for the development of 
inactivated vaccines that utilizes reduced concentrations of H2O2 in combination 
with copper (cupric ions, Cu2+) complexed with the antiviral compound, 
methisazone (MZ). Further enhancement of this oxidative approach included the 
addition of a low percentage of formaldehyde, a cross-linking reagent with a 
different mechanism of action that, together with H2O2/Cu/MZ, provides a robust 
two-pronged approach to virus inactivation. Together, this new approach results 
in rapid virus inactivation while greatly improving the maintenance of 
WNV-specific neutralizing epitopes mapped across the three structural domains of 
the WNV envelope protein. In combination with more refined manufacturing 
techniques, this inactivation technology resulted in vaccine-mediated 
WNV-specific neutralizing antibody responses that were 130-fold higher than that 
observed using the first generation, H2O2-only vaccine approach and provided 
100% protection against lethal WNV infection. This new approach to vaccine 
development represents an important area for future investigation with the 
potential not only for improving vaccines against WNV, but other clinically 
relevant viruses as well.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.12.020
PMCID: PMC6599721
PMID: 30606462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: OHSU and MKS 
have a financial interest in Najít Technologies, Inc., a company that may have a 
commercial interest in the results of this research and technology. This 
potential individual and institutional conflict of interest has been reviewed 
and managed by OHSU. BKQ, DEPD and IJA are employees of Najít Technologies, Inc. 
AT declares no relevant conflicts of interest. No writing assistance was 
utilized in the production of this manuscript.