1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2019 Aug;65:238-245. doi: 
10.1016/j.cimid.2019.06.008. Epub 2019 Jun 28.

A common conserved peptide harboring predicted T and B cell epitopes in domain 
III of envelope protein of Japanese Encephalitis Virus and West Nile Virus for 
potential use in epitope based vaccines.

Slathia PS(1), Sharma P(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Kakrial, Katra, 
J&K, India. Electronic address: parvezsingh@gmail.com.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Kakrial, Katra, 
J&K, India.

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) and West Nile virus (WNV) are two major 
mosquito borne flaviviruses belonging to same serocomplex. JEV is transmitted by 
Culex mosquitoes and the reservoir host for the virus is pigs and/or water 
birds. WNV is also transmitted by Culex mosquitoes and reservoir host in this 
case is birds. It can also be transmitted through contact with other infected 
animals, their blood, or other tissues. The envelope protein of these viruses is 
the major source of epitopes and provides protective immunity. Bioinformatics 
tools were used to identify conserved epitopes in the envelope protein of these 
viruses. A conserved peptide "TPVGRLVTVNPFV" present in both the viruses 
containing predicted T and B cell epitopes was found. The model of one of the 
predicted epitope was generated and upon docking it bound in the groove of 
HLA-A0201 Class I MHC molecule. Further, it was amenable to proteasomal cleavage 
enhancing its chances of processing by cytosolic pathway. The peptide was found 
to be non toxic, non allergenic and stable in mammalian cells based on database 
search. The population coverage was pan world and nearly 70% identity of the 
peptide was found in the Zika virus envelope protein. The peptide was located in 
the domain III of envelope protein which is the exposed domain therefore B cell 
receptors may recognize this peptide easily. The conserved peptide containing T 
and B cell epitopes can have future application for designing epitope based 
vaccines for both JEV and WNV.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2019.06.008
PMID: 31300121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]