1. Indian J Med Res. 2019 May;149(5):656-661. doi: 10.4103/ijmr.IJMR_305_17.

Cloning, expression & evaluation of potential immunogenic recombinant capsid 
premembrane protein of West Nile virus.

Kumar JS(1), Rathinam S(2), Karothia D(1), Parida M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, Defence Research & Development Establishment, Gwalior, 
India.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: West Nile virus (WNV) is a neurotropic flavivirus that 
has emerged globally as a significant cause of viral encephalitis. The early 
confirmatory diagnosis of WNV infections is important for timely clinical 
management and in areas where multiple flaviviruses are endemic. Diagnosis of 
WNV infection is primarily based on serodiagnosis, followed by virus isolation 
and identification. The aim of this study was to develop and evaluate a highly 
sensitive and specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) ELISA using the recombinant CprM 
protein (rWNV-CprM) for rapid, early and accurate diagnosis of WNV.
METHODS: The gene coding for the CprM protein of WNV was cloned and expressed in 
pET 28a vector followed by purification. An indirect IgM microplate ELISA using 
purified rWNV-CprM protein was optimized having no cross-reactivity with healthy 
human serum and serum samples obtained from patients with dengue and Japanese 
encephalitis viruses infection.
RESULTS: The comparative evaluation of this rWNV-CprM protein-specific IgM ELISA 
with plaque reduction neutralization test using 105 blood samples collected from 
patients suspected to have acute WNV infection revealed 98 per cent concordance 
with sensitivity and specificity of 100 and 97 per cent, respectively.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: The recombinant CprM protein-based WNV-specific 
ELISA reported in this study may be useful for rapid screening of large numbers 
of blood samples in endemic areas during outbreaks.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmr.IJMR_305_17
PMCID: PMC6702705
PMID: 31417034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None