1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jan 23;11:16. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00016. eCollection 
2020.

CD4 T Cell Determinants in West Nile Virus Disease and Asymptomatic Infection.

Koblischke M(1), Spitzer FS(1), Florian DM(1), Aberle SW(1), Malafa S(1), Fae 
I(2), Cassaniti I(3)(4), Jungbauer C(5), Knapp B(6), Laferl H(7), Fischer G(2), 
Baldanti F(3)(4), Stiasny K(1), Heinz FX(1), Aberle JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Molecular Virology Unit, Microbiology and Virology Department, Fondazione 
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical, Surgical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences, 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Blood Service for Vienna, Lower Austria and Burgenland, Austrian Red Cross, 
Vienna, Austria.
(6)Data Science Section, Symptoma GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Sozialmedizinisches Zentrum Süd, Kaiser-Franz-Josef-Spital, Vienna, Austria.

West Nile (WN) virus infection of humans is frequently asymptomatic, but can 
also lead to WN fever or neuroinvasive disease. CD4 T cells and B cells are 
critical in the defense against WN virus, and neutralizing antibodies, which are 
directed against the viral glycoprotein E, are an accepted correlate of 
protection. For the efficient production of these antibodies, B cells interact 
directly with CD4 helper T cells that recognize peptides from E or the two other 
structural proteins (capsid-C and membrane-prM/M) of the virus. However, the 
specific protein sites yielding such helper epitopes remain unknown. Here, we 
explored the CD4 T cell response in humans after WN virus infection using a 
comprehensive library of overlapping peptides covering all three structural 
proteins. By measuring T cell responses in 29 individuals with either WN virus 
disease or asymptomatic infection, we showed that CD4 T cells focus on peptides 
in specific structural elements of C and at the exposed surface of the pre- and 
postfusion forms of the E protein. Our data indicate that these immunodominant 
epitopes are recognized in the context of multiple different HLA molecules. 
Furthermore, we observed that immunodominant antigen regions are structurally 
conserved and similarly targeted in other mosquito-borne flaviviruses, including 
dengue, yellow fever, and Zika viruses. Together, these findings indicate a 
strong impact of virion protein structure on epitope selection and antigenicity, 
which is an important issue to consider in future vaccine design.

Copyright © 2020 Koblischke, Spitzer, Florian, Aberle, Malafa, Fae, Cassaniti, 
Jungbauer, Knapp, Laferl, Fischer, Baldanti, Stiasny, Heinz and Aberle.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00016
PMCID: PMC6989424
PMID: 32038660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]