1. J Virol. 2020 Jun 1;94(12):e00086-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00086-20. Print 2020
Jun  1.

A Molecular Determinant of West Nile Virus Secretion and Morphology as a Target 
for Viral Attenuation.

Basset J(1)(2), Burlaud-Gaillard J(3)(4), Feher M(5), Roingeard P(3)(4), Rey 
FA(6)(7), Pardigon N(8).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Arbovirus Group, Environment and Infectious Risks Unit, 
Paris, France.
(2)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Cellule Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(3)Plateforme IBISA de Microscopie Electronique, PST ASB, Université de Tours 
and CHRU de Tours, Tours, France.
(4)INSERM U1259, Université de Tours and CHRU de Tours, Tours, France.
(5)Laboratory for Urgent Response to Biological Threats, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.
(6)Institut Pasteur, Structural Virology Unit, Paris, France.
(7)CNRS UMR 3569, Virologie, Paris, France.
(8)Institut Pasteur, Arbovirus Group, Environment and Infectious Risks Unit, 
Paris, France nathalie.pardigon@pasteur.fr.

West Nile virus (WNV), a member of the Flavivirus genus and currently one of the 
most common arboviruses worldwide, is associated with severe neurological 
disease in humans. Its high potential to reemerge and rapidly disseminate makes 
it a bona fide global public health problem. The surface membrane glycoprotein 
(M) has been associated with Flavivirus-induced pathogenesis. Here, we 
identified a key amino acid residue at position 36 of the M protein whose 
mutation impacts WNV secretion and promotes viral attenuation. We also 
identified a compensatory site at position M-43 whose mutation stabilizes M-36 
substitution both in vitro and in vivo Moreover, we found that introduction of 
the two mutations together confers a full attenuation phenotype and protection 
against wild-type WNV lethal challenge, eliciting potent neutralizing-antibody 
production in mice. Our study thus establishes the M protein as a new viral 
target for rational design of attenuated WNV strains.IMPORTANCE West Nile virus 
(WNV) is a worldwide (re)emerging mosquito-transmitted Flavivirus causing fatal 
neurological diseases in humans. However, no human vaccine has been yet 
approved. One of the most effective live-attenuated vaccines was empirically 
obtained by serial passaging of wild-type yellow fever Flavivirus However, such 
an approach is not acceptable nowadays, and the development of a rationally 
designed vaccine is necessary. Generating molecular infectious clones and 
mutating specific residues known to be involved in Flavivirus virulence 
constitute a powerful tool to promote viral attenuation. WNV membrane 
glycoprotein is thought to carry such essential determinants. Here, we 
identified two residues of this protein whose substitutions are key to the full 
and stable attenuation of WNV in vivo, most likely through inhibition of 
secretion and possible alteration of morphology. Applied to other flaviviruses, 
this approach should help in designing new vaccines against these viruses, which 
are an increasing threat to global human health.

Copyright © 2020 Basset et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00086-20
PMCID: PMC7307099
PMID: 32269117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]