1. Viral Immunol. 2020 Jul/Aug;33(6):423-433. doi: 10.1089/vim.2019.0122. Epub
2020  Apr 22.

Vaccines Against Dengue and West Nile Viruses in India: The Need of the Hour.

Gore MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Emeritus Scientist, ICMR-National Institute of Virology, Pune, India.

The circulation of flaviviruses, dengue (DEN), Japanese encephalitis (JE) and 
West Nile (WN) viruses, and others, is generating a major concern in many 
countries. Both JE along with DEN have been endemic in large regions of India. 
WN virus infection, although circulating in southern regions for many years, in 
recent years, WN encephalitis patients have been demonstrated. While vaccines 
against JE have been developed and decrease outbreaks, in case of DEN and WN, 
vaccines are still in developing level, especially, it has been difficult to 
achieve the long-term protective immune response. The first licensed DEN 
vaccine, which is a live attenuated vaccine, was administered in countries where 
the virus is endemic, and has a potential to cause serious side effects, 
especially when administered to younger population as observed in the 
Philippines vaccination drive. In the case of WN, although the purified 
inactivated virion-based vaccine worked effectively as a veterinary vaccine for 
horses, no effective vaccine has yet been licensed for humans. The induction of 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses is essential to complete protection by these 
viruses, as evidenced by responses to asymptomatic infections. Many studies have 
shown that neutralizing antibody (NAb) response is against surface structural 
proteins; CD4+ and CD8+ responses are mainly directed against nonstructural 
proteins rather than NAb response. New data suggest that encapsulating virus 
vaccines in nanoparticles (NPs) will direct antigen in cytoplasmic compartment 
by antigen-presenting cells, which will improve presentation to CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells. Since tissue culture-derived, purified inactivated viruses are easier to 
manufacture and safer than developing live virus vaccines, inclusion of NP 
provides an attractive alternative for generating robust flaviviral vaccines 
that are affordable with long-lived protection.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2019.0122
PMID: 32320353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]