1. Protein Sci. 2020 Nov;29(11):2175-2188. doi: 10.1002/pro.3937. Epub 2020 Sep
4.

Development and characterization of specific anti-Usutu virus chicken-derived 
single chain variable fragment antibodies.

Schoenenwald AKJ(1), Gwee CP(2), Stiasny K(3), Hermann M(1), Vasudevan 
SG(2)(4)(5), Skern T(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Programme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, 
Singapore.
(3)Center for Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(5)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Queensland, 
Australia.

Usutu virus belongs to the Japanese encephalitis serogroup within the 
Flaviviridae family. Mammals may become incidental hosts after the bite of an 
infected mosquito while birds act as the main reservoir. Human cases have become 
more common recently and elicit various outcomes ranging from asymptomatic to 
severe illness including encephalitis. Problematically, antisera against Usutu 
virus cross-react with other flaviviruses such as the co-circulating West Nile 
virus. As an approach to generate Usutu virus-specific antibodies, we immunized 
chickens with purified Usutu virus envelope protein domain III, isolated the 
spleen mRNA and generated an scFv phage display library. The most potent binders 
for Usutu virus domain III were selected via biopanning and their affinity to 
domain III was examined using SPR. Four scFvs bound the domain III of Usutu 
virus in the nanomolar region; two bound the protein over 40 times more strongly 
than West Nile virus domain III. We further characterized these scFv antibodies 
for suitability in standard laboratory tests such as western blots, ELISA, and 
neutralization tests. Four specific and one cross-reactive antibody performed 
well in western blots with domain III and the full-length envelope protein of 
Usutu virus and West Nile virus. All antibodies bound in virus ELISA assays to 
Usutu virus strain Vienna-2001. However, none of the antibodies neutralized 
either Usutu virus or West Nile virus. These antibody candidates could be 
crucial in future diagnostic tests to distinguish Usutu virus from other 
flaviviruses and might even offer virus neutralization after a conversion to Fab 
or IgG.

© 2020 The Authors. Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3937
PMCID: PMC7586906
PMID: 32829514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]