1. Vaccines (Basel). 2020 Oct 13;8(4):603. doi: 10.3390/vaccines8040603.

A Recombinant Zika Virus Envelope Protein with Mutations in the Conserved Fusion 
Loop Leads to Reduced Antibody Cross-Reactivity upon Vaccination.

Berneck BS(1), Rockstroh A(1), Fertey J(1), Grunwald T(1), Ulbert S(1).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer-Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is a zoonotic, human pathogenic, and mosquito-borne 
flavivirus. Its distribution is rapidly growing worldwide. Several attempts to 
develop vaccines for ZIKV are currently ongoing. Central to most vaccination 
approaches against flavivirus infections is the envelope (E) protein, which is 
the major target of neutralizing antibodies. Insect-cell derived, recombinantly 
expressed variants of E from the flaviviruses West Nile and Dengue virus have 
entered clinical trials in humans. Also for ZIKV, these antigens are promising 
vaccine candidates. Due to the structural similarity of flaviviruses, 
cross-reactive antibodies are induced by flavivirus antigens and have been 
linked to the phenomenon of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection (ADE). 
Especially the highly conserved fusion loop domain (FL) in the E protein is a 
target of such cross-reactive antibodies. In areas where different flaviviruses 
co-circulate and heterologous infections cannot be ruled out, this is of 
concern. To exclude the possibility that recombinant E proteins of ZIKV might 
induce ADE in infections with related flaviviruses, we performed an immunization 
study with an insect-cell derived E protein containing four mutations in and 
near the FL. Our data show that this mutant antigen elicits antibodies with 
equal neutralizing capacity as the wildtype equivalent. However, it induces much 
less serological cross-reactivity and does not cause ADE in vitro. These results 
indicate that mutated variants of the E protein might lead to ZIKV and other 
flavivirus vaccines with increased safety profiles.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines8040603
PMCID: PMC7712286
PMID: 33066262

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.