1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Oct 26;16(10):e1009009. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009009. 
eCollection 2020 Oct.

MAVS regulates the quality of the antibody response to West-Nile Virus.

O'Ketch M(1), Williams S(1), Larson C(1), Uhrlaub JL(1), Wong R(1)(2), Hall 
B(1), Deshpande NR(1), Schenten D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United 
States of America.
(2)Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University in St. 
Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

A key difference that distinguishes viral infections from protein immunizations 
is the recognition of viral nucleic acids by cytosolic pattern recognition 
receptors (PRRs). Insights into the functions of cytosolic PRRs such as the 
RNA-sensing Rig-I-like receptors (RLRs) in the instruction of adaptive immunity 
are therefore critical to understand protective immunity to infections. West 
Nile virus (WNV) infection of mice deficent of RLR-signaling adaptor MAVS 
results in a defective adaptive immune response. While this finding suggests a 
role for RLRs in the instruction of adaptive immunity to WNV, it is difficult to 
interpret due to the high WNV viremia, associated exessive antigen loads, and 
pathology in the absence of a MAVS-dependent innate immune response. To overcome 
these limitations, we have infected MAVS-deficient (MAVSKO) mice with a 
single-round-of-infection mutant of West Nile virus. We show that MAVSKO mice 
failed to produce an effective neutralizing antibody response to WNV despite 
normal antibody titers against the viral WNV-E protein. This defect occurred 
independently of antigen loads or overt pathology. The specificity of the 
antibody response in infected MAVSKO mice remained unchanged and was still 
dominated by antibodies that bound the neutralizing lateral ridge (LR) epitope 
in the DIII domain of WNV-E. Instead, MAVSKO mice produced IgM antibodies, the 
dominant isotype controlling primary WNV infection, with lower affinity for the 
DIII domain. Our findings suggest that RLR-dependent signals are important for 
the quality of the humoral immune response to WNV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009009
PMCID: PMC7644103
PMID: 33104760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.