1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2022 Mar;69(2):776-792. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14050. Epub
2021  Mar 31.

Co-infections: Simultaneous detections of West Nile virus and Usutu virus in 
birds from Germany.

Santos PD(1), Michel F(2), Wylezich C(1), Höper D(1), Keller M(2), Holicki 
CM(2), Szentiks CA(3), Eiden M(2), Muluneh A(4), Neubauer-Juric A(5), Thalheim 
S(6), Globig A(7), Beer M(1), Groschup MH(2)(8), Ziegler U(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal 
Research Institute for Animal Health, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(2)Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, 
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(3)Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research (IZW), Berlin, Germany.
(4)Saxon State Laboratory of Health and Veterinary Affairs, Dresden, Germany.
(5)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Oberschleissheim, Germany.
(6)Berlin-Brandenburg State Laboratory, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany.
(7)Institute of International Animal Health/One Health, 
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, 
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(8)German Centre for Infection Research, partner site 
Hamburg-Luebeck-Borstel-Riems, Hamburg, Germany.

The emergence of West Nile virus (WNV) and Usutu virus (USUV) in Europe resulted 
in significant outbreaks leading to avifauna mortality and human infections. 
Both viruses have overlapping geographical, host and vector ranges, and are 
often co-circulating in Europe. In Germany, a nationwide bird surveillance 
network was established to monitor these zoonotic arthropod-borne viruses in 
migratory and resident birds. In this framework, co-infections with WNV and USUV 
were detected in six dead birds collected in 2018 and 2019. Genomic sequencing 
and phylogenetic analyses classified the detected WNV strains as lineage 2 and 
the USUV strains as lineages Africa 2 (n = 2), Africa 3 (n = 3) and Europe 2 
(n = 1). Preliminary attempts to co-propagate both viruses in vitro failed. 
However, we successfully cultivated WNV from two animals. Further evidence for 
WNV-USUV co-infection was obtained by sampling live birds in four zoological 
gardens with confirmed WNV cases. Three snowy owls had high neutralizing 
antibody titres against both WNV and USUV, of which two were also positive for 
USUV-RNA. In conclusion, further reports of co-infections in animals as well as 
in humans are expected in the future, particularly in areas where both viruses 
are present in the vector population.

© 2021 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases published by Wiley-VCH 
GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14050
PMID: 33655706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]