1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):725-738. doi: 
10.1080/22221751.2021.1908850.

Pathogenesis and shedding of Usutu virus in juvenile chickens.

Kuchinsky SC(1), Frere F(1), Heitzman-Breen N(2), Golden J(3), Vázquez A(4), 
Honaker CF(5), Siegel PB(5), Ciupe SM(2), LeRoith T(1), Duggal NK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(4)National Centre for Microbiology, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), 
Epidemiology and Public Health Network of Biomedical Research Centre (CIBERESP), 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Usutu virus (USUV; family: Flaviviridae, genus: Flavivirus), is an emerging 
zoonotic arbovirus that causes severe neuroinvasive disease in humans and has 
been implicated in the loss of breeding bird populations in Europe. USUV is 
maintained in an enzootic cycle between ornithophilic mosquitos and wild birds. 
As a member of the Japanese encephalitis serocomplex, USUV is closely related to 
West Nile virus (WNV) and St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), both 
neuroinvasive arboviruses endemic in wild bird populations in the United States. 
An avian model for USUV is essential to understanding zoonotic transmission. 
Here we describe the first avian models of USUV infection with the development 
of viremia. Juvenile commercial ISA Brown chickens were susceptible to infection 
by multiple USUV strains with evidence of cardiac lesions. Juvenile chickens 
from two chicken lines selected for high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody production 
against sheep red blood cells showed markedly different responses to USUV 
infection. Morbidity and mortality were observed in the LAS chickens, but not 
HAS chickens. LAS chickens had significantly higher viral titers in blood and 
other tissues, as well as oral secretions, and significantly lower development 
of neutralizing antibody responses compared to HAS chickens. Mathematical 
modelling of virus-host interactions showed that the viral clearance rate is a 
stronger mitigating factor for USUV viremia than neutralizing antibody response 
in this avian model. These chicken models provide a tool for further 
understanding USUV pathogenesis in birds and evaluating transmission dynamics 
between avian hosts and mosquito vectors.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1908850
PMCID: PMC8043533
PMID: 33769213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).