1. J Zoo Wildl Med. 2021 Apr;52(1):185-191. doi: 10.1638/2020-0068.

WEST NILE VIRUS SEROCONVERSION IN EASTERN LOGGERHEAD SHRIKE (LANIUS LUDOVICIANUS 
MIGRANS) AFTER VACCINATION WITH A KILLED VACCINE.

Schutten K(1), Chabot A(2), Wheeler H(3).

Author information:
(1)African Lion Safari, Cambridge, ON, Canada N1R 5S2, kerryschutten@gmail.com.
(2)African Lion Safari, Cambridge, ON, Canada N1R 5S2.
(3)Wildlife Preservation Canada, Guelph, ON, Canada N1H 6J2.

The loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus migrans) is a migratory songbird that 
has undergone massive population declines in Ontario since the 1950s. As part of 
a broad strategy of recovery, a captive breeding population was established in 
the late 1990s. This species appears to be extremely sensitive to West Nile 
virus (WNV) infection, with prior outbreaks at Ontario breeding facilities 
reaching a 100% mortality rate. This study aimed to investigate the humoral 
response to vaccination in juvenile birds given single versus serial booster 
vaccinations, as well as to assess the duration of protective virus-neutralizing 
titers in annually vaccinated adult birds, by measuring WNV-neutralizing 
antibodies via the Plaque Reduction Neutralization Test. Twenty-two adult birds 
and forty 18-22-day-old chicks were included in the study. Annual vaccination 
resulted in serum neutralizing antibody against WNV for only 59% of adult 
individuals 1 yr following vaccination. These results, coupled with the death of 
one vaccinated adult individual due to WNV infection, suggest that a second 
booster vaccination may be required to adequately protect adult individuals 
throughout the WNV transmission season. The results of the trial involving 
juvenile birds indicate that vaccination does not effectively stimulate the 
immune system of naïve juveniles to produce serum-neutralizing antibodies 
against WNV in the majority of tested birds, although serial booster vaccination 
appears to provide a level of improved seroconversion. However, the loss of 19% 
of naïve juveniles to natural WNV infection versus a less than 3% loss of 
juveniles that received at least one vaccination suggests some level of 
cell-mediated immunity and protection against infection takes place in juvenile 
birds postvaccination. The deaths of several nonvaccinated juveniles and one 
vaccinated adult at this study facility suggest that WNV continues to be a 
pathogen of high risk in this species in captivity, and likely in the wild as 
well.

DOI: 10.1638/2020-0068
PMID: 33827175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]