1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Sep 13;12:738619. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.738619. 
eCollection 2021.

A Plant-Produced Virus-Like Particle Displaying Envelope Protein Domain III 
Elicits an Immune Response Against West Nile Virus in Mice.

Stander J(1), Chabeda A(2), Rybicki EP(1)(3), Meyers AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Biopharming Research Unit, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States.
(3)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health 
Science, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

West Nile virus (WNV) is a globally disseminated Flavivirus that is associated 
with encephalitis outbreaks in humans and horses. The continuous global 
outbreaks of West Nile disease in the bird, human, and horse populations, with 
no preventative measures for humans, pose a major public health threat. The 
development of a vaccine that contributes to the "One Health" Initiative could 
be the answer to prevent the spread of the virus and control human and animal 
disease. The current commercially available veterinary vaccines are generally 
costly and most require high levels of biosafety for their manufacture. 
Consequently, we explored making a particulate vaccine candidate made 
transiently in plants as a more cost-effective and safer means of production. A 
WNV virus-like particle-display-based vaccine candidate was generated by the use 
of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher (ST/SC) conjugation system. The WNV envelope protein 
domain III (EDIII), which contains WNV-specific epitopes, was fused to and 
displayed on AP205 phage virus-like particles (VLPs) following the production of 
both separately in Nicotiana benthamiana. Co-purification of AP205 and EDIII 
genetically fused to ST and SC, respectively, resulted in the conjugated VLPs 
displaying EDIII with an average coupling efficiency of 51%. Subcutaneous 
immunisation of mice with 5 μg of purified AP205: EDIII VLPs elicited a potent 
IgG response to WNV EDIII. This study presents the potential plants being used 
as biofactories for making significant pharmaceutical products for the "One 
Health" Initiative and could be used to address the need for their local 
production in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).

Copyright © 2021 Stander, Chabeda, Rybicki and Meyers.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.738619
PMCID: PMC8475786
PMID: 34589108

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.