1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0244021. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02440-21. Epub 2021 Oct
12.

Human Monoclonal Antibodies against NS1 Protein Protect against Lethal West Nile 
Virus Infection.

Wessel AW(#)(1)(2), Doyle MP(#)(3)(4), Engdahl TB(3)(4), Rodriguez J(3), Crowe 
JE Jr(3)(4)(5), Diamond MS(1)(2)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(3)Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Centergrid.412807.8, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Centergrid.412807.8, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Centergrid.412807.8, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)The Andrew M. and Jane M. Bursky Center for Human Immunology and 
Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Envelope protein-targeted vaccines for flaviviruses are limited by concerns of 
antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of infections. Nonstructural protein 1 
(NS1) provides an alternative vaccine target that avoids this risk since this 
protein is absent from the virion. Beyond its intracellular role in virus 
replication, extracellular forms of NS1 function in immune modulation and are 
recognized by host-derived antibodies. The rational design of NS1-based vaccines 
requires an extensive understanding of the antigenic sites on NS1, especially 
those targeted by protective antibodies. Here, we isolated human monoclonal 
antibodies (MAbs) from individuals previously naturally infected with WNV, 
mapped their epitopes using structure-guided mutagenesis, and evaluated their 
efficacy in vivo against lethal WNV challenge. The most protective epitopes 
clustered at three antigenic sites that are exposed on cell surface forms of 
NS1: (i) the wing flexible loop, (ii) the outer, electrostatic surface of the 
wing, and (iii) the spaghetti loop face of the β-ladder. One additional MAb 
mapped to the distal tip of the β-ladder and conferred a lower level of 
protection against WNV despite not binding to NS1 on the surface of infected 
cells. Our study defines the epitopes and modes of binding of protective 
anti-NS1 MAb antibodies following WNV infection, which may inform the 
development of NS1-based countermeasures against flaviviruses. IMPORTANCE 
Therapeutic antibodies against flaviviruses often promote neutralization by 
targeting the envelope protein of the virion. However, this approach is hindered 
by a possible concern for antibody-dependent enhancement of infection and 
paradoxical worsening of disease. As an alternative strategy, antibodies 
targeting flavivirus nonstructural protein 1 (NS1), which is absent from the 
virion, can protect against disease and do not cause enhanced infection. Here, 
we evaluate the structure-function relationships and protective activity of West 
Nile virus (WNV) NS1-specific monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) isolated from the 
memory B cells of a naturally infected human donor. We identify several anti-NS1 
MAbs that protect mice against lethal WNV challenge and map their epitopes using 
charge reversal mutagenesis. Antibodies targeting specific regions in the NS1 
structure could serve as the basis for countermeasures that control WNV 
infection in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02440-21
PMCID: PMC8510529
PMID: 34634945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]