1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2022 Sep;69(5):2779-2787. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14429. Epub 
2022 Jan 10.

Serological differentiation of West Nile virus- and Usutu virus-induced 
antibodies by envelope proteins with modified cross-reactive epitopes.

Berneck BS(1), Rockstroh A(1), Barzon L(2), Sinigaglia A(2), Vocale C(3), 
Landini MP(4), Rabenau HF(5), Schmidt-Chanasit J(6), Ulbert S(1).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)CRREM. Unità Operativa di Microbiologia, IRCCS Policlinico di S. Orsola, 
Bologna, Italy.
(4)Clinical Microbiology Unit, Regional Reference Centre for Microbiological 
Emergencies-CRREM, St. Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Institute of Medical Virology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(6)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

West Nile virus (WNV) and Usutu virus (USUV) are mosquito-borne viruses that 
belong to the Japanese encephalitis virus serocomplex within the genus 
Flavivirus. Due to climate change and the expansion of mosquito vectors, 
flaviviruses are becoming endemic in increasing numbers of countries. WNV 
infections are reported with symptoms ranging from mild fever to severe 
neuro-invasive disease. Until now, only a few USUV infections have been reported 
in humans, mostly with mild symptoms. The serological diagnosis and 
differentiation between flavivirus infections, in general, and between WNV and 
USUV, in particular, are challenging due to the high degree of cross-reacting 
antibodies, especially of those directed against the conserved fusion loop (FL) 
domain of the envelope (E) protein. We have previously shown that E proteins 
containing four amino-acid mutations in and near the FL strongly reduce the 
binding of cross-reactive antibodies leading to diagnostic technologies with 
improved specificities. Here, we expanded the technology to USUV and analyzed 
the differentiation of USUV- and WNV-induced antibodies in humans. IgG ELISAs 
modified by an additional competition step with the heterologous antigen 
resulted in overall specificities of 93.94% for WNV Equad and 92.75% for USUV 
Equad. IgM antibodies against WNV could be differentiated from USUV IgM in a 
direct comparison using both antigens. The data indicate the potential of the 
system to diagnose antigenically closely related flavivirus infections.

© 2021 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases published by Wiley-VCH 
GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14429
PMID: 34919790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]