1. Vaccine. 2022 Oct 6;40(42):6004-6011. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.012. Epub
 2022 Sep 13.

Engineered flavivirus vaccines control induction of crossreactive 
infection-enhancing and -neutralizing antibodies.

Yamanaka A(1), Rattanaamnuaychai P(2), Matsuda M(3), Suzuki R(3), Matsuura Y(4), 
Tatsumi M(2), Konishi E(5).

Author information:
(1)Thailand-Japan Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging 
Infections (RCC-ERI), Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of Public Health, 
Nonthaburi, Thailand; Mahidol-Osaka Center for Infectious Diseases, Faculty of 
Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; BIKEN Endowed 
Department of Dengue Vaccine Development, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: knmya@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Thailand-Japan Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging 
Infections (RCC-ERI), Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of Public Health, 
Nonthaburi, Thailand.
(3)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Virus Control, Center for Infectious Disease Education and 
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan; Research Institute for 
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(5)BIKEN Endowed Department of Dengue Vaccine Development, Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Flaviviruses are important human pathogens because of their global distribution 
and disease severity. The high structural similarity among flaviviruses induces 
cross-immunity, with individual flaviviruses exhibiting crossreactive 
infection-enhancing and/or -neutralizing activities against other flaviviruses. 
Unlike neutralizing antibodies, enhancing antibodies may increase the risk of 
disease severity. Vaccine-induced enhancement remains a concern in the 
development of flavivirus vaccines. Here, we immunized mice with DNA vaccine 
candidates (pcJEME, pcWNME or pcZIKME) against Japanese encephalitis virus 
(JEV), West Nile virus (WNV) or Zika virus (ZIKV), respectively, and 
investigated crossreactive neutralizing and enhancing antibody activities 
against seven flaviviruses. pcZIKME induced higher cross-neutralization against 
dengue viruses than against JEV and WNV. Moreover, pcZIKME with a single amino 
acid substitution (D87N) showed an increase in crossreactive neutralizing 
activity and a decrease in enhancing activities against other flaviviruses. A 
similar trend was observed in pcWNME. Engineered antigen might contribute to the 
development of safe and effective flavivirus vaccines.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.09.012
PMID: 36109279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.