1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Apr 13;11(2):e0502722. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.05027-22. 
Epub 2023 Feb 14.

Validation of a Reporter Cell Line for Flavivirus Inhibition Assays.

Rezende TMT(1), Macera G(1), Heyndrickx L(1), Michiels J(1), Coppens S(1), 
Thibaut HJ(2), Dallmeier K(3), Van Esbroeck M(4), Neyts J(3), Ariën KK(1), 
Bartholomeeusen K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Virology 
Unit, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega 
Institute, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Translational Platform 
Virology and Chemotherapy (TPVC), Leuven, Belgium.
(3)KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega 
Institute, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Molecular Vaccinology and 
Vaccine Discovery (MVVD), Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Clinical 
Reference Lab, Antwerp, Belgium.

Here, we report the validation of a new reporter cell line, Hec1a-IFNB-Luc, for 
use in inhibition studies of various flaviviruses relevant to human pathology. 
The reporter system allows the detection of viral replication after luciferase 
gene activation driven by an interferon beta (IFN-β) promoter. We found the 
reporter cell line to be highly responsive to all 10 flaviviruses tested, 
including the 4 dengue virus serotypes. The applicability of the Hec1a-IFNB-Luc 
reporter cell line for serodiagnostic purposes in neutralizing antibody assays 
was confirmed by comparison of its sensitivity and specificity to those of 
"gold-standard," clinically applied, cytopathic effect-based assays, showing 
comparable performances. The reporter cell line used for the assessment of viral 
inhibition by small-molecule antiviral compounds was also confirmed, and the 
sensitivity of the Hec1a-IFNB-Luc reporter cell line was compared to those from 
published data reporting on the activity of the antivirals in various other 
assays, indicating that the Hec1a-IFNB-Luc reporter cell line allowed the 
determination of the inhibitory capacity at least as sensitive as alternative 
assays. By measuring luciferase activity as a proxy for viral replication, the 
reporter cell line allows early detection, reducing the time to results from 
often 5 to 7 days to 3 days, without the need for optical inspection of 
cytopathic effects, which often differ between viruses and cell lines, 
streamlining the development of flavivirus assays. IMPORTANCE The Hec1a-IFNB-Luc 
reporter cell line allows the detection of all 10 flaviviruses tested, including 
the 4 dengue virus serotypes. Its use for serodiagnostic purposes, measuring 
neutralizing antibody activity in sera, and the assessment of the antiviral 
activities of small-molecule compounds was confirmed, and it was found to be 
comparable to clinically applied assays. The Hec1a-IFNB-Luc reporter cell line 
allows the rapid and quantitative determination of antiviral effects on multiple 
human pathological flaviviruses using a single protocol.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.05027-22
PMCID: PMC10100686
PMID: 36786659

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.