1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jul 20;14:1203561. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1203561. 
eCollection 2023.

Clodronate is not protective in lethal viral encephalitis despite substantially 
reducing inflammatory monocyte infiltration in the CNS.

Spiteri AG(1)(2), van Vreden C(1)(2), Ashhurst TM(3), Niewold P(1)(2)(4), King 
NJC(1)(2)(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Viral Immunopathology Laboratory, Infection, Immunity and Inflammation 
Research Theme, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Sydney Cytometry, The University of Sydney and Centenary Institute, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
(5)The University of Sydney Institute for Infectious Diseases, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)The University of Sydney Nano Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.

Bone marrow (BM)-derived monocytes induce inflammation and tissue damage in a 
range of pathologies. In particular, in a mouse model of West Nile virus (WNV) 
encephalitis (WNE), nitric oxide-producing, Ly6Chi inflammatory monocytes from 
the BM are recruited to the central nervous system (CNS) and contribute to 
lethal immune pathology. Reducing the migration of these cells into the CNS 
using monoclonal antibody blockade, immune-modifying particles or CSF-1R 
inhibitors reduces neuroinflammation, improving survival and/or clinical 
outcomes. Macrophages can also be targeted more broadly by administration of 
clodronate-encapsulated liposomes, which induce apoptosis in phagocytes. In this 
study, clodronate reduced the inflammatory infiltrate by 70% in WNE, however, 
surprisingly, this had no effect on disease outcome. More detailed analysis 
demonstrated a compensatory increase in neutrophils and enhanced activation 
status of microglia in the brain. In addition, we observed increased numbers of 
Ly6Chi BM monocytes with an increased proliferative capacity and expression of 
SCA-1 and CD16/32, potentially indicating output of immature cells from the BM. 
Once in the brain, these cells were more phagocytic and had a reduced expression 
of antigen-presenting molecules. Lastly, we show that clodronate also reduces 
non-myeloid cells in the spleen and BM, as well as ablating red blood cells and 
their proliferation. These factors likely impeded the therapeutic potential of 
clodronate in WNE. Thus, while clodronate provides an excellent system to 
deplete macrophages in the body, it has larger and broader effects on the 
phagocytic and non-phagocytic system, which must be considered in the 
interpretation of data.

Copyright © 2023 Spiteri, van Vreden, Ashhurst, Niewold and King.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1203561
PMCID: PMC10403146
PMID: 37545511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.