1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2024 Feb;30(2):206-210. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.09.025.
 Epub 2023 Oct 5.

Severe zoonotic viruses carried by different species of bats and their regional 
distribution.

Liu Z(1), Liu Q(1), Wang H(1), Yao X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Center of Immunomolecular Engineering, Innovation & 
Practice Base for Graduate Students Education, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 
City, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, Center of Immunomolecular Engineering, Innovation & 
Practice Base for Graduate Students Education, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 
City, China. Electronic address: immunology@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Bats have garnered increased attention in the field of life sciences 
for their typical biological characteristics of carrying a variety of zoonotic 
viruses without disease, long lifespans, low tumorigenesis rates, and high 
metabolism. When it was found that bats can carry the rabies virus, over 
60 years of research revealed that bats host over 4100 distinct viruses, 
including Ebola virus and SARS-CoV.
OBJECTIVES: This paper primarily reviews the profiles of zoonotic viruses 
carried by bats across various regions globally. The review aims to provide a 
foundation and reference for future research on monitoring zoonotic viruses in 
diverse global regions and bat species, exploring the coevolutionary 
relationship between bats and viruses, understanding the tolerance mechanisms of 
bat B cells, prevention, and treatment of zoonotic diseases caused by bats.
SOURCES: The search used 'bat', 'bats', 'rabies virus', 'Dengue virus', 'West 
Nile virus', 'Zika virus', 'St. Louis encephalitis virus', 'Japanese 
encephalitis virus', 'Hantavirus', 'Novel hantavirus', 'Rift Valley fever 
virus', 'Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus', 'Paramyxovirus', 'Nipah virus', 
'Hendra virus', 'Menangle virus', 'Tioman virus', 'Marburg Virus', 'Bombali 
virus', 'Ebola virus', 'Influenza A virus', 'coronavirus', 'Hepatitis B virus', 
and 'Hepatitis E virus' as text in PubMed.
CONTENT: A total of 147 references were obtained. Surveys on severe zoonotic 
virus carriage have been limited to only 83 bat species belonging to nine 
families, which are distributed all over the world. We also briefly describe the 
antibody responses and B-cell molecules in bats.
IMPLICATIONS: Several viruses have been found in different species of bats. This 
suggests that bats may be important hosts for future viral infectious diseases. 
Particularly in recent years, the close correlation between human infection 
pandemics caused by coronaviruses and bats highlights the pressing need to 
comprehend the species, tolerance, and coevolutionary mechanisms of zoonotic 
viruses carried by different bat species.

Copyright © 2023 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.09.025
PMID: 37805032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]