1. Commun Med (Lond). 2023 Oct 19;3(1):148. doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00378-7.

Neutralizing antibodies from prior exposure to dengue virus negatively correlate 
with viremia on re-infection.

Anantharaj A(1), Agrawal T(1), Shashi PK(1), Tripathi A(#)(1), Kumar P(#)(1), 
Khan I(1), Pareek M(1), Singh B(1), Pattabiraman C(2), Kumar S(1), Pandey R(3), 
Chandele A(4), Lodha R(5), Whitehead SS(6), Medigeshi GR(7).

Author information:
(1)Bioassay laboratory and Clinical and Cellular Virology lab, Translational 
Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad, Haryana, India.
(2)Independent researcher, Bengaluru, India.
(3)INtegrative GENomics of HOst-PathogEn (INGEN-HOPE) laboratory, Division of 
Immunology and Infectious Disease Biology, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and 
Integrative Biology, Delhi, India.
(4)ICGEB-Emory Vaccine Center, International Center for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari 
Nagar, New Delhi, India.
(6)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(7)Bioassay laboratory and Clinical and Cellular Virology lab, Translational 
Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad, Haryana, India. 
gmedigeshi@thsti.res.in.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: India is hyperendemic to dengue and over 50% of adults are 
seropositive. There is limited information on the association between 
neutralizing antibody profiles from prior exposure and viral RNA levels during 
subsequent infection.
METHODS: Samples collected from patients with febrile illness was used to assess 
seropositivity by indirect ELISA. Dengue virus (DENV) RNA copy numbers were 
estimated by quantitative RT-PCR and serotype of the infecting DENV was 
determined by nested PCR. Focus reduction neutralizing antibody titer (FRNT) 
assay was established using Indian isolates to measure the levels of 
neutralizing antibodies and also to assess the cross-reactivity to related 
flaviviruses namely Zika virus (ZIKV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) and 
West Nile virus (WNV).
RESULTS: In this cross-sectional study, we show that dengue seropositivity 
increased from 52% in the 0-15 years group to 89% in >45 years group. Antibody 
levels negatively correlate with dengue RNAemia on the day of sample collection 
and higher RNAemia is observed in primary dengue as compared to secondary 
dengue. The geometric mean FRNT50 titers for DENV-2 is significantly higher as 
compared to the other three DENV serotypes. We observe cross-reactivity with 
ZIKV and significantly lower or no neutralizing antibodies against JEV and WNV. 
The FRNT50 values for international isolates of DENV-1, DENV-3 and DENV-4 is 
significantly lower as compared to Indian isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: Majority of the adult population in India have neutralizing 
antibodies to all the four DENV serotypes which correlates with reduced RNAemia 
during subsequent infection suggesting that antibodies can be considered as a 
good correlate of protection.

Plain Language Summary: India is one of the hotspots of dengue infection. The 
objective of the study was to assess whether having previous exposure to dengue 
virus could influence how the body will respond to repeat infections with dengue 
virus. Here, we analysed samples from febrile patients to measure the amount of 
dengue virus genetic material in the blood, the type of virus and the amount of 
antibodies, which are proteins produced by the host in response to dengue virus 
infection. The majority of patient samples demonstrated the capability to 
restrict all four types of dengue virus in circulation within the country, but 
reduced capacity to restrict when it comes to international dengue virus types. 
These data will help to inform future dengue vaccine design and clinical studies 
in India.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-023-00378-7
PMCID: PMC10587183
PMID: 37857747

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.