1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Nov 15;13:1279147. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1279147. eCollection 2023.

Immunization with different recombinant West Nile virus envelope proteins 
induces varying levels of serological cross-reactivity and protection from 
infection.

Weiß R(1), Issmail L(1), Rockstroh A(1), Grunwald T(1), Fertey J(1), Ulbert 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Department of Vaccines 
and Infection Models, Leipzig, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: West Nile Virus (WNV) is a zoonotic flavivirus transmitted by 
mosquitoes. Especially in the elderly or in immunocompromised individuals an 
infection with WNV can lead to severe neurological symptoms. To date, no human 
vaccine against WNV is available. The Envelope (E) protein, located at the 
surface of flaviviruses, is involved in the invasion into host cells and is the 
major target for neutralizing antibodies and therefore central to vaccine 
development. Due to their close genetic and structural relationship, 
flaviviruses share highly conserved epitopes, such as the fusion loop domain 
(FL) in the E protein, that are recognized by cross-reactive antibodies. These 
antibodies can lead to enhancement of infection with heterologous flaviviruses, 
which is a major concern for potential vaccines in areas with co-circulation of 
different flaviviruses, e.g. Dengue or Zika viruses.
MATERIAL: To reduce the potential of inducing cross-reactive antibodies, we 
performed an immunization study in mice using WNV E proteins with either wild 
type sequence or a mutated FL, and WNV E domain III which does not contain the 
FL at all.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Our data show that all antigens induce high levels of 
WNV-binding antibodies. However, the level of protection against WNV varied, 
with the wildtype E protein inducing full, the other antigens only partial 
protection. On the other hand, serological cross-reactivity to heterologous 
flaviviruses was significantly reduced after immunization with the mutated E 
protein or domain III as compared to the wild type version. These results have 
indications for choosing antigens with the optimal specificity and efficacy in 
WNV vaccine development.

Copyright © 2023 Weiß, Issmail, Rockstroh, Grunwald, Fertey and Ulbert.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1279147
PMCID: PMC10684968
PMID: 38035335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SU is co-author on the patent US 10060924 which 
describes the Equad protein of WNV. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.