1. Microb Cell Fact. 2023 Dec 8;22(1):251. doi: 10.1186/s12934-023-02259-z.

Selective extraction of recombinant membrane proteins from Hansenula polymorpha 
by pulsed electric field and lytic enzyme pretreatment.

Ganeva V(1), Kranz A(2).

Author information:
(1)Biological Faculty, Department of Biophysics & Radiobiology, Sofia 
University, 8 Dragan Tzankov blvd, Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria. 
valentinaganeva@abv.bg.
(2)ARTES Biotechnology GmbH, Elizabeth Selbert str. 9, 40764, Langenfeld, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: In yeast, recombinant membrane proteins including viral scaffold 
proteins used for the formation of enveloped Virus-like particles (eVLPs) 
typically accumulate intracellularly. Their recovery is carried out by 
mechanical disruption of the cells, often in combination with detergent 
treatment. Cell permeabilization is an attractive alternative to mechanical 
lysis because it allows for milder and more selective recovery of different 
intracellular products.
RESULTS: Here, we present a novel approach for extraction of integral membrane 
proteins from yeast based on cell envelope permeabilization through a 
combination of pulsed electric field and lytic enzyme pretreatment of the cells. 
Our primary experiments focused on Hansenula polymorpha strain #25-5 
co-expressing the integral membrane small surface protein (dS) of the duck 
hepatitis B virus and a fusion protein of dS with a trimer of a Human 
papillomavirus (HPV) L2-peptide (3xL2-dS). Irreversible plasma membrane 
permeabilization was induced by treating the cell suspension with monopolar 
rectangular pulses using a continuous flow system. The permeabilized cells were 
incubated with lyticase and dithiothreitol. This treatment increased the cell 
wall permeability, resulting in the release of over 50% of the soluble host 
proteins without causing significant cell lysis. The subsequent incubation with 
Triton X-100 resulted in the solubilization and release of a significant portion 
of 3xL2-dS and dS from the cells. By applying two steps: (i) brief heating of 
the cells before detergent treatment, and (ii) incubation of the extracts with 
KSCN, an 80% purity on the protein level has been achieved. Experiments 
performed with H. polymorpha strain T#3-3, co-expressing dS and the fusion 
protein EDIIIWNV-dS consisting of dS and the antigen from the West Nile virus 
(WSV), confirmed the applicability of this approach for recovering dS. The 
treatment, optimal for solubilization of 3xL2-dS and a significant part of dS, 
was not effective in isolating the fused protein EDIIIWNV-dS from the membranes, 
resulting in its retention within the cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents an alternative approach for the recovery and 
partial purification of viral membrane proteins expressed in H. polymorpha. The 
factors influencing the effectiveness of this procedure and its potential use 
for the recovery of other integral membrane proteins are discussed.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-023-02259-z
PMCID: PMC10704748
PMID: 38066481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.