1. Cureus. 2024 Mar 27;16(3):e57063. doi: 10.7759/cureus.57063. eCollection 2024 
Mar.

Rehabilitation Outcomes in Multiple Sclerosis Patients on Ocrelizumab Diagnosed 
With West Nile Virus Encephalitis.

Johnson TR(1), Gandelman S(2), Serafin LR(1), Charles JY(1), Jacobs D(3).

Author information:
(1)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Hospital of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(2)Neurology, Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, USA.
(3)Neurology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) has a global prevalence exceeding two million people and 
is a leading cause of non-traumatic physical disability. MS can be treated with 
ocrelizumab, an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody. West Nile virus (WNV) is the most 
common cause of mosquito-borne viral encephalitis in North America. It can lead 
to neuroinvasive WNV disease (WNND) affecting the brain and peripheral nervous 
system, especially in immunocompromised patients, such as those being treated 
with ocrelizumab for MS. WNND is exceedingly rare and reported in less than 1% 
of cases of WNV. It has been established that inpatient rehabilitation improves 
functional outcomes in patients with MS and those with WNND. However, the 
inpatient rehabilitation outcomes in patients diagnosed with both WNND and MS 
have not been reported. In this study, we aimed to examine the rehabilitation 
outcomes of MS patients on ocrelizumab diagnosed with WNND. We performed a 
retrospective chart review of patients with MS treated with ocrelizumab, who 
were diagnosed with WNND and admitted to a single facility. Rehabilitation 
outcomes were assessed using functional independence measure (FIM) scores on 
admission and discharge. Three patients met the inclusion criteria; two in acute 
rehab, and one in the long-term acute care hospital (LTACH). Both patients 
admitted to acute inpatient rehabilitation showed an improvement in FIM scores 
from admission to discharge, one patient from 9 to 16 and the other from 14 to 
54. However, the patient admitted to the LTACH had no improvement in FIM score 
from admission to discharge. Patients admitted to acute rehab were ultimately 
discharged home, while the patient admitted to the LTACH required discharge to a 
subacute rehabilitation facility. Based on our findings, intense and prolonged 
comprehensive inpatient rehabilitation is associated with improved functional 
outcomes and increased likelihood of discharge to home in this population 
suffering from both central and peripheral nervous system involvement due to MS 
and WNND.

Copyright © 2024, Johnson et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.57063
PMCID: PMC11052554
PMID: 38681299

Conflict of interest statement: In the past three years, Dr. Gandelman has 
participated in an advisory board for Genentech. The relationship is not 
ongoing.