1. Comput Biol Chem. 2026 Jun;122:108890. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2026.108890.  Epub 2026 Jan 8.

In silico post-hoc analysis of a clinically tested recombinant West Nile virus 
envelope protein vaccine.

Reiné J(1), Tinnirello R(2), Cagigi A(3), Leow CY(4), Leow CH(5), Iannolo G(6), 
Douradinha B(7).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom; Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Centro de Estudios de Salud, Universidad 
del Valle de Guatemala, Guatemala City, Guatemala.
(2)IRCCS-ISMETT (Istituto Mediterraneo per i Trapianti e Terapie ad Alta 
Specializzazione), Palermo, Italy.
(3)International Vaccine Institute (IVI) Europe Regional Office, Solna, Sweden.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, 
Malaysia.
(5)Institute for Research in Molecular Medicine (INFORMM), Universiti Sains 
Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia.
(6)IRCCS-ISMETT (Istituto Mediterraneo per i Trapianti e Terapie ad Alta 
Specializzazione), Palermo, Italy; Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia, 
Università Kore di Enna, Enna, Italy. Electronic address: giannolo@ismett.edu.
(7)Pandemic Sciences Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
bruno.douradinha@ndm.ox.ac.uk.

The recombinant West Nile virus (WNV) envelope (Env) protein WN80E is one of the 
few WNV antigens that has been evaluated in humans and has demonstrated robust 
immunogenicity across animal models and in a Phase I clinical trial. Here, we 
performed a retrospective in silico analysis of WN80E and its variant containing 
a N-terminal methionine (WNM80E) to assess how accurately contemporary 
computational vaccinology tools can capture and differentiate their structural 
and immunological profiles. Physicochemical and sequence-based predictions 
classified both constructs as antigenic, non-allergenic, and containing stable 
disulfide patterns, although WNM80E exhibited markedly improved predicted in 
vitro and in vivo half-lives. Tertiary structure modeling and subsequent 
refinement produced high-confidence homodimeric structures for both antigens, 
with favorable stereochemical metrics and preserved quaternary organization. 
Conformational B cell epitope mapping identified hinge-proximal and domain II 
antigenic patches with high solvent accessibility and minimal glycan shielding. 
Molecular docking with the broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibody CR4354 
yielded energetically favorable complexes for both constructs, with slightly 
enhanced interface complementarity for WNM80E. Immune simulations predicted 
strong and durable humoral and cellular responses for both antigens, dominated 
by a Th1 signature, sustained memory formation, and repeated antigen clearance 
following booster doses. These findings demonstrate that results from in silico 
vaccinology tools further support continued evaluation of the clinically tested 
WN80E antigen in clinical trials and identify WNM80E as a structurally and 
immunologically comparable variant with modestly improved predicted stability 
and immunogenicity. This work highlights the utility of integrated computational 
pipelines for antigen evaluation.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2026.108890
PMID: 41518987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.