1. J Med Virol. 1999 Dec;59(4):552-60.

Lassa and Mopeia virus replication in human monocytes/macrophages and in 
endothelial cells: different effects on IL-8 and TNF-alpha gene expression.

Lukashevich IS(1), Maryankova R, Vladyko AS, Nashkevich N, Koleda S, Djavani M, 
Horejsh D, Voitenok NN, Salvato MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Cells of the mononuclear and endothelial lineages are targets for viruses which 
cause hemorrhagic fevers (HF) such as the filoviruses Marburg and Ebola, and the 
arenaviruses Lassa and Junin. A recent model of Marburg HF pathogenesis proposes 
that virus directly causes endothelial cell damage and macrophage release of 
TNF-alpha which increases the permeability of endothelial monolayers [Feldmann 
et al. , 1996]. We show that Lassa virus replicates in human 
monocytes/macrophages and endothelial cells without damaging them. Human 
endothelial cells (HUVEC) are highly susceptible to infection by both Lassa and 
Mopeia (a non-pathogenic Lassa-related arenavirus). Whereas monocytes must 
differentiate into macrophages before supporting even low level production of 
these viruses, the virus yields in the culture medium of infected HUVEC cells 
reach more than 7 log10 PFU/ml without cellular damage. In contrast to 
filovirus, Lassa virus replication in monocytes/macrophages fails to stimulate 
TNF-alpha gene expression and even down-regulates LPS-stimulated TNF-alpha mRNA 
synthesis. The expression of IL-8, a prototypic proinflammatory CXC chemokine, 
was also suppressed in Lassa virus infected monocytes/macrophages and HUVEC on 
both the protein and mRNA levels. This contrasts with Mopeia virus infection of 
HUVEC in which neither IL-8 mRNA nor protein are reduced. The cumulative 
down-regulation of TNF-alpha and IL-8 expression could explain the absence of 
inflammatory and effective immune responses in severe cases of Lassa HF.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2391009
PMID: 10534741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]