1. J Virol. 2000 Mar;74(5):2186-92. doi: 10.1128/jvi.74.5.2186-2192.2000.

Characterization of human CD4(+) T-cell clones recognizing conserved and 
variable epitopes of the Lassa virus nucleoprotein.

ter Meulen J(1), Badusche M, Kuhnt K, Doetze A, Satoguina J, Marti T, Loeliger 
C, Koulemou K, Koivogui L, Schmitz H, Fleischer B, Hoerauf A.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Virology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 
Hamburg, Germany. termeulen@bni.uni-hamburg.de

T cells must play the major role in controlling acute human Lassa virus 
infection, because patients recover from acute Lassa fever in the absence of a 
measurable neutralizing antibody response. T cells alone seem to protect animals 
from a lethal Lassa virus challenge, because after experimental vaccination no 
neutralizing antibodies are detectable. In order to study human T-cell 
reactivity to single Lassa virus proteins, the nucleoprotein (NP) of Lassa 
virus, strain Josiah, was cloned, expressed in Escherichia coli, and affinity 
purified. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) obtained from 8 of 13 
healthy, Lassa virus antibody-positive individuals living in the Republic of 
Guinea, western Africa, were found to proliferate in response to the recombinant 
protein (proliferation index >/=10). PBMC obtained from one individual with a 
particularly high proliferative response were used to generate 50 NP-specific 
T-cell clones (TCC). For six of these the epitopes were mapped with overlapping 
synthetic peptides derived from the sequence of the NP. These CD4(+) TCC 
displayed high specific proliferation and produced mainly gamma interferon upon 
stimulation with NP. Because variation of up to 15% in the amino acid sequences 
of the structural proteins of naturally occurring Lassa virus variants has been 
observed, the reactivity of the TCC with peptides derived from the homologous 
epitopes of the Nigeria strain of Lassa virus and of the eastern Africa 
arenavirus Mopeia was tested. With the Nigeria strain of Lassa virus the levels 
of homology were 100% for two of these epitopes and 85% for three of them, 
whereas homology with the respective Mopeia epitopes ranged from 92 to 69%. 
Reactivity of the TCC with peptides derived from the variable epitopes of the 
Nigeria strain and of Mopeia was reduced or completely abolished. This report 
shows for the first time that seropositive individuals from areas of endemicity 
have very strong memory CD4(+) T-cell responses against the NP of Lassa virus, 
which are partly strain specific and partly cross-reactive with other Lassa 
virus strains. Our findings may have important implications for the strategy of 
designing recombinant vaccines against this mainly T-cell-controlled human 
arenavirus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.5.2186-2192.2000
PMCID: PMC111699
PMID: 10666248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]