1. Virology. 2006 Sep 15;353(1):111-20. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.05.018. Epub
2006  Jun 21.

Receptor use by pathogenic arenaviruses.

Reignier T(1), Oldenburg J, Noble B, Lamb E, Romanowski V, Buchmeier MJ, Cannon 
PM.

Author information:
(1)Saban Research Institute of Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 
90027, USA.

The arenavirus family contains several important human pathogens including Lassa 
fever virus (LASV), lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) and the New World 
clade B viruses Junin (JUNV) and Machupo (MACV). Previously, alpha-dystroglycan 
(alpha-DG) was identified as a receptor recognized by LASV and certain strains 
of LCMV. However, other studies have suggested that alpha-DG is probably not 
used by the clade B viruses, and the receptor(s) for these pathogens is 
currently unknown. Using pseudotyped retroviral vectors displaying arenavirus 
glycoproteins (GPs), we are able to explore the role played by the GP in viral 
entry in the absence of other viral proteins. By examining the ability of the 
vectors to transduce DG knockout murine embryonic stem (ES) cells, we have 
confirmed that LASV has an absolute requirement for alpha-DG in these cells. 
However, the LCMV GP can still direct substantial entry into murine ES cells in 
the absence of alpha-DG, even when the GP from the clone 13 variant is used that 
has previously been reported to be highly dependent on alpha-DG for entry. We 
also found that neither LASV or LCMV pseudotyped vectors were able to transduce 
human or murine lymphocytes, presumably due to the glycosylation state of 
alpha-DG in these cells. In contrast, the JUNV and MACV GPs displayed broad 
tropism on human, murine and avian cell types, including lymphocytes, and showed 
no requirement for alpha-DG in murine ES cells. These findings highlight the 
importance of molecules other than alpha-DG for arenavirus entry. An alternate 
receptor is present on murine ES cells that can be used by LCMV but not by LASV, 
and which is not available on human or murine lymphocytes, while a distinct and 
widely expressed receptor(s) is used by the clade B viruses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.05.018
PMID: 16797051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]