1. J Virol. 2008 Aug;82(15):7677-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00560-08. Epub 2008 May 28.

Different mechanisms of cell entry by human-pathogenic Old World and New World 
arenaviruses.

Rojek JM(1), Sanchez AB, Nguyen NT, de la Torre JC, Kunz S.

Author information:
(1)Viral Immunobiology Laboratory, Department of Immunology and Microbial 
Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The Old World arenavirus Lassa virus (LASV) is the causative agent of severe 
viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) in humans and is the most prevalent human pathogen 
among arenaviruses. The present study investigated the largely unknown 
mechanisms of cell entry of LASV, a process know to be mediated solely by the 
virus envelope glycoprotein (GP). To circumvent biosafety restrictions 
associated with the use of live LASV, we used reverse genetics to generate a 
recombinant variant of the prototypic arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus (LCMV) expressing the LASV GP (rLCMV-LASVGP). The rescued rLCMV-LASVGP 
grew to titers comparable to that of LCMV and showed the receptor binding 
characteristics of LASV. We used rLCMV-LASVGP to characterize the cellular 
mechanisms of LASV entry in the context of a productive arenavirus infection. 
The kinetics of pH-dependent membrane fusion of rLCMV-LASVGP resembled those of 
the human-pathogenic New World arenavirus Junin virus (JUNV) and other enveloped 
viruses that use clathrin-mediated endocytosis for entry. However, rLCMV-LASVGP 
entered cells predominantly via a clathrin-, caveolin-, and dynamin-independent 
endocytotic pathway similar to the one recently described for LCMV. Productive 
infection of rLCMV-LASVGP was only mildly affected by a dominant negative mutant 
of Rab5 and was independent of Rab7, suggesting an unusual mechanism of delivery 
to endosomes. In addition, rLCMV-LASVGP infection was independent of actin but 
required intact microtubules. Our data indicate that LASV enters cells via a 
pathway distinct from the one used by human-pathogenic New World arenaviruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00560-08
PMCID: PMC2493302
PMID: 18508885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]