1. Virol J. 2008 Dec 23;5:161. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-161.

Uncoupling GP1 and GP2 expression in the Lassa virus glycoprotein complex: 
implications for GP1 ectodomain shedding.

Illick MM(1), Branco LM, Fair JN, Illick KA, Matschiner A, Schoepp R, Garry RF, 
Guttieri MC.

Author information:
(1)BioFactura, Inc., Rockville, MD, USA. millick@biofactura.com

BACKGROUND: Sera from convalescent Lassa fever patients often contains 
antibodies to Lassa virus (LASV) glycoprotein 1 (GP1), and glycoprotein 2 (GP2); 
Immunization of non-human primates with viral vectors expressing the arenaviral 
glycoprotein complex (GPC) confers full protective immunity against a lethal 
challenge with LASV. Thus, the development of native or quasi native recombinant 
LASV GP1 and GP2 as soluble, uncoupled proteins will improve current 
diagnostics, treatment, and prevention of Lassa fever. To this end, mammalian 
expression systems were engineered for production and purification of secreted 
forms of soluble LASV GP1 and GP2 proteins.
RESULTS: Determinants for mammalian cell expression of secreted uncoupled Lassa 
virus (LASV) glycoprotein 1 (GP1) and glycoprotein 2 (GP2) were established. 
Soluble GP1 was generated using either the native glycoprotein precursor (GPC) 
signal peptide (SP) or human IgG signal sequences (s.s.). GP2 was secreted from 
cells only when (1) the transmembrane (TM) domain was deleted, the intracellular 
domain (IC) was fused to the ectodomain, and the gene was co-expressed with a 
complete GP1 gene in cis; (2) the TM and IC domains were deleted and GP1 was 
co-expressed in cis; (3) expression of GP1 was driven by the native GPC SP. 
These data implicate GP1 as a chaperone for processing and shuttling GP2 to the 
cell surface. The soluble forms of GP1 and GP2 generated through these studies 
were secreted as homogeneously glycosylated proteins that contained high mannose 
glycans. Furthermore, observation of GP1 ectodomain shedding from cells 
expressing wild type LASV GPC represents a novel aspect of arenaviral 
glycoprotein expression.
CONCLUSION: These results implicate GP1 as a chaperone for the correct 
processing and shuttling of GP2 to the cell surface, and suggest that native GPC 
SP plays a role in this process. In the absence of GP1 and GPC SP the GP2 
protein may be processed by an alternate pathway that produces heterogeneously 
glycosylated protein, or the polypeptide may not fully mature in the secretory 
cascade in mammalian cells. The expression constructs developed in these studies 
resulted in the generation and purification of soluble, uncoupled GP1 and GP2 
proteins from mammalian cells with quasi-native properties. The observation of 
GP1 ectodomain shedding from cells expressing wild type LASV GPC establishes new 
correlates of disease progression and highlights potential opportunities for 
development of diagnostics targeting the early stages of Lassa fever.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-161
PMCID: PMC2645378
PMID: 19105844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]