1. Virol J. 2009 Sep 24;6:147. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-147.

Characterization of the Lassa virus GP1 ectodomain shedding: implications for 
improved diagnostic platforms.

Branco LM(1), Garry RF.

Author information:
(1)Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA. 
lbranco@tulane.edu

BACKGROUND: There is a significant requirement for the development and 
acquisition of reagents that will facilitate effective diagnosis, treatment, and 
prevention of Lassa fever. In this regard, detection of early markers of Lassa 
virus (LASV) infection may improve diagnosis and ultimately successful treatment 
with antivirals. Characterization of LASV GP1 ectodomain shedding is an 
important step toward developing sensitive diagnostics to detect circulating 
levels of this viral glycoprotein in infected patient sera.
RESULTS: Secretion of GP1 from mammalian cells expressing a native LASV GPC gene 
was not mediated by proteolytic cleavage, as determined by treatment with a 
panel of matrix metalloprotease (MMP) inhibitors. The shedding of GP1 was also 
not the result of over-expression of GPC under the control of a strong intron-A 
containing CMV promoter, as the soluble component could be immunoprecipitated 
from supernatants of cells expressing low levels of GPC under the control of an 
intronless promoter. Cells transfected with GPC retained surface 
membrane-associated expression of GP1 as determined by immunofluorescence assay, 
in addition to secreting the glycoprotein.Secreted GP1 derived from GPC 
expression has a higher content of high mannose N-linked glycosylation than sGP1 
expressed independently from the GP2 portion of the protein. Neither GP1 isoform 
contains sialylated N-glycans, O-linked carbohydrate chains, or 
galactose-beta(1-4)-N-acetylglucosamine commonly present in complex and hybrid 
N-glycan structures.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate the non-proteolytic secretory nature of 
GP1 shedding during expression of the arenaviral glycoprotein complex. This 
phenomenon parallels shedding of a secretory glycoprotein component in filovirus 
replication. The glycosylation pattern of soluble GP1 resulting from expression 
of GPC was different from that of a soluble GP1 construct (sGP1-RRAA-FLAG), 
highlighting the intricately orchestrated post translational processing of the 
LASV glycoprotein complex.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-147
PMCID: PMC2759938
PMID: 19778448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]