1. J Virol. 2010 Jan;84(1):573-84. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01697-09.

Targeting the proteolytic processing of the viral glycoprotein precursor is a 
promising novel antiviral strategy against arenaviruses.

Rojek JM(1), Pasqual G, Sanchez AB, Nguyen NT, de la Torre JC, Kunz S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California 920371, USA.

A crucial step in the arenavirus life cycle is the biosynthesis of the viral 
envelope glycoprotein (GP) responsible for virus attachment and entry. 
Processing of the GP precursor (GPC) by the cellular proprotein convertase site 
1 protease (S1P), also known as subtilisin-kexin-isozyme 1 (SKI-1), is crucial 
for cell-to-cell propagation of infection and production of infectious virus. 
Here, we sought to evaluate arenavirus GPC processing by S1P as a target for 
antiviral therapy using a recently developed peptide-based S1P inhibitor, 
decanoyl (dec)-RRLL-chloromethylketone (CMK), and the prototypic arenavirus 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). To control for off-target effects of 
dec-RRLL-CMK, we employed arenavirus reverse genetics to introduce a furin 
recognition site into the GPC of LCMV. The rescued mutant virus grew to normal 
titers, and the processing of its GPC critically depended on cellular furin, but 
not S1P. Treatment with the S1P inhibitor dec-RRLL-CMK resulted in specific 
blocking of viral spread and virus production of LCMV. Combination of the 
protease inhibitor with ribavirin, currently used clinically for treatment of 
human arenavirus infections, resulted in additive drug effects. In cells 
deficient in S1P, the furin-dependent LCMV variant established persistent 
infection, whereas wild-type LCMV underwent extinction without the emergence of 
S1P-independent escape variants. Together, the potent antiviral activity of an 
inhibitor of S1P-dependent GPC cleavage, the additive antiviral effect with 
ribavirin, and the low probability of emergence of S1P-independent viral escape 
variants make S1P-mediated GPC processing by peptide-derived inhibitors a 
promising strategy for the development of novel antiarenaviral drugs.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01697-09
PMCID: PMC2798452
PMID: 19846507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]