1. Virol J. 2010 Oct 20;7:279. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-279.

Lassa virus-like particles displaying all major immunological determinants as a 
vaccine candidate for Lassa hemorrhagic fever.

Branco LM(1), Grove JN, Geske FJ, Boisen ML, Muncy IJ, Magliato SA, Henderson 
LA, Schoepp RJ, Cashman KA, Hensley LE, Garry RF.

Author information:
(1)Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lassa fever is a neglected tropical disease with significant impact 
on the health care system, society, and economy of Western and Central African 
nations where it is endemic. Treatment of acute Lassa fever infections has 
successfully utilized intravenous administration of ribavirin, a nucleotide 
analogue drug, but this is not an approved use; efficacy of oral administration 
has not been demonstrated. To date, several potential new vaccine platforms have 
been explored, but none have progressed toward clinical trials and 
commercialization. Therefore, the development of a robust vaccine platform that 
could be generated in sufficient quantities and at a low cost per dose could 
herald a subcontinent-wide vaccination program. This would move Lassa endemic 
areas toward the control and reduction of major outbreaks and endemic 
infections. To this end, we have employed efficient mammalian expression systems 
to generate a Lassa virus (LASV)-like particle (VLP)-based modular vaccine 
platform.
RESULTS: A mammalian expression system that generated large quantities of LASV 
VLP in human cells at small scale settings was developed. These VLP contained 
the major immunological determinants of the virus: glycoprotein complex, 
nucleoprotein, and Z matrix protein, with known post-translational 
modifications. The viral proteins packaged into LASV VLP were characterized, 
including glycosylation profiles of glycoprotein subunits GP1 and GP2, and 
structural compartmentalization of each polypeptide. The host cell protein 
component of LASV VLP was also partially analyzed, namely glycoprotein 
incorporation, though the identity of these proteins remain unknown. All 
combinations of LASV Z, GPC, and NP proteins that generated VLP did not 
incorporate host cell ribosomes, a known component of native arenaviral 
particles, despite detection of small RNA species packaged into pseudoparticles. 
Although VLP did not contain the same host cell components as the native virion, 
electron microscopy analysis demonstrated that LASV VLP appeared structurally 
similar to native virions, with pleiomorphic distribution in size and shape. 
LASV VLP that displayed GPC or GPC+NP were immunogenic in mice, and generated a 
significant IgG response to individual viral proteins over the course of three 
immunizations, in the absence of adjuvants. Furthermore, sera from convalescent 
Lassa fever patients recognized VLP in ELISA format, thus affirming the presence 
of native epitopes displayed by the recombinant pseudoparticles.
CONCLUSIONS: These results established that modular LASV VLP can be generated 
displaying high levels of immunogenic viral proteins, and that small laboratory 
scale mammalian expression systems are capable of producing multi-milligram 
quantities of pseudoparticles. These VLP are structurally and morphologically 
similar to native LASV virions, but lack replicative functions, and thus can be 
safely generated in low biosafety level settings. LASV VLP were immunogenic in 
mice in the absence of adjuvants, with mature IgG responses developing within a 
few weeks after the first immunization. These studies highlight the relevance of 
a VLP platform for designing an optimal vaccine candidate against Lassa 
hemorrhagic fever, and warrant further investigation in lethal challenge animal 
models to establish their protective potential.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-279
PMCID: PMC2984592
PMID: 20961433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]