1. Virol J. 2010 Nov 9;7:306. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-306.

Shedding of soluble glycoprotein 1 detected during acute Lassa virus infection 
in human subjects.

Branco LM(1), Grove JN, Moses LM, Goba A, Fullah M, Momoh M, Schoepp RJ, Bausch 
DG, Garry RF.

Author information:
(1)Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lassa hemorrhagic fever (LHF) is a neglected tropical disease with 
significant impact on the health care system, society, and economy of Western 
and Central African nations where it is endemic. With a high rate of infection 
that may lead to morbidity and mortality, understanding how the virus interacts 
with the host's immune system is of great importance for generating vaccines and 
therapeutics. Previous work by our group identified a soluble isoform of the 
Lassa virus (LASV) GP1 (sGP1) in vitro resulting from the expression of the 
glycoprotein complex (GPC) gene [1, 2]. Though no work has directly been done to 
demonstrate the function of this soluble isoform in arenaviral infections, 
evidence points to immunomodulatory effects against the host's immune system 
mediated by a secreted glycoprotein component in filoviruses, another class of 
hemorrhagic fever-causing viruses. A significant fraction of shed glycoprotein 
isoforms during viral infection and biogenesis may attenuate the host's 
inflammatory response, thereby enhancing viral replication and tissue damage. 
Such shed glycoprotein mediated effects were previously reported for Ebola virus 
(EBOV), a filovirus that also causes hemorrhagic fever with nearly 90 percent 
fatality rates [3 - 5]. The identification of an analogous phenomenon in vivo 
could establish a new correlate of LHF infection leading to the development of 
sensitive diagnostics targeting the earliest molecular events of the disease. 
Additionally, the reversal of potentially untoward immunomodulatory functions 
mediated by sGP1 could potentiate the development of novel therapeutic 
intervention. To this end, we investigated the presence of sGP1 in the serum of 
suspected LASV patients admitted to the Kenema Government Hospital (KGH) Lassa 
Fever Ward (LFW), in Kenema, Sierra Leone that tested positive for viral antigen 
or displayed classical signs of Lassa fever.
RESULTS: It is reasonable to expect that a narrow window exists for detection of 
sGP1 as the sole protein shed during early arenaviral biogenesis. This 
phenomenon was clearly distinguishable from virion-associated GP1 only prior to 
the emergence of de novo viral particles. Despite this restricted time frame, in 
2/46 suspected cases in two studies performed in late 2009 and early 2010, 
soluble glycoprotein component shedding was identified. Differential detection 
of viral antigens GP1, GP2, and NP by western blot yielded five different 
scenarios: whole LASV virions (GP1, GP2, NP; i.e. active viremia), different 
combinations of these three proteins, sGP1 only, NP only, and absence of all 
three proteins. Four additional samples showed inconclusive evidence for sGP1 
shedding due to lack of detection of GP2 and NP in western blot; however, a 
sensitive LASV NP antigen capture ELISA generated marginally positive signals.
CONCLUSIONS: During a narrow window following active infection with LASV, 
soluble GP1 can be detected in patient sera. This phenomenon parallels other VHF 
infection profiles, with the actual role of a soluble viral glycoprotein 
component in vivo remaining largely speculative. The expenditure of energy and 
cellular resources toward secretion of a critical protein during viral 
biogenesis without apparent specific function requires further investigation. 
Future studies will be aimed at systematically identifying the role of LASV sGP1 
in the infection process and outcome in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-306
PMCID: PMC2993672
PMID: 21062490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]