1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 25;286(8):6192-200. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.196428. Epub 
2010 Dec 15.

A specific interaction of small molecule entry inhibitors with the envelope 
glycoprotein complex of the Junín hemorrhagic fever arenavirus.

Thomas CJ(1), Casquilho-Gray HE, York J, DeCamp DL, Dai D, Petrilli EB, Boger 
DL, Slayden RA, Amberg SM, Sprang SR, Nunberg JH.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics, University of Montana, 
Missoula, Montana 59812, USA. celestine.thomas@umontana.edu

Arenaviruses are responsible for acute hemorrhagic fevers worldwide and are 
recognized to pose significant threats to public health and biodefense. Small 
molecule compounds have recently been discovered that inhibit arenavirus entry 
and protect against lethal infection in animal models. These chemically distinct 
inhibitors act on the tripartite envelope glycoprotein (GPC) through its unusual 
stable signal peptide subunit to stabilize the complex against pH-induced 
activation of membrane fusion in the endosome. Here, we report the production 
and characterization of the intact transmembrane GPC complex of Junín arenavirus 
and its interaction with these inhibitors. The solubilized GPC is antigenically 
indistinguishable from the native protein and forms a homogeneous trimer in 
solution. When reconstituted into a lipid bilayer, the purified complex 
interacts specifically with its cell-surface receptor transferrin receptor-1. We 
show that small molecule entry inhibitors specific to New World or Old World 
arenaviruses bind to the membrane-associated GPC complex in accordance with 
their respective species selectivities and with dissociation constants 
comparable with concentrations that inhibit GPC-mediated membrane fusion. 
Furthermore, competitive binding studies reveal that these chemically distinct 
inhibitors share a common binding pocket on GPC. In conjunction with previous 
genetic studies, these findings identify the pH-sensing interface of GPC as a 
highly vulnerable target for antiviral intervention. This work expands our 
mechanistic understanding of arenavirus entry and provides a foundation to guide 
the development of small molecule compounds for the treatment of arenavirus 
hemorrhagic fevers.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.196428
PMCID: PMC3057843
PMID: 21159779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]