1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e51114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051114. Epub 2012 Nov 
30.

Biochemical reconstitution of hemorrhagic-fever arenavirus envelope 
glycoprotein-mediated membrane fusion.

Thomas CJ(1), Shankar S, Casquilho-Gray HE, York J, Sprang SR, Nunberg JH.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics, The University of Montana, 
Missoula, MT, USA.

The membrane-anchored proteins of enveloped viruses form labile spikes on the 
virion surface, primed to undergo large-scale conformational changes culminating 
in virus-cell membrane fusion and viral entry. The prefusion form of these 
envelope glycoproteins thus represents an important molecular target for 
antiviral intervention. A critical roadblock to this endeavor has been our 
inability to produce the prefusion envelope glycoprotein trimer for biochemical 
and structural analysis. Through our studies of the GPC envelope glycoprotein of 
the hemorrhagic fever arenaviruses, we have shown that GPC is unique among class 
I viral fusion proteins in that the mature complex retains a stable signal 
peptide (SSP) in addition to the conventional receptor-binding and transmembrane 
fusion subunits. In this report we show that the recombinant GPC precursor can 
be produced as a discrete native-like trimer and that its proteolytic cleavage 
generates the mature glycoprotein. Proteoliposomes containing the cleaved GPC 
mediate pH-dependent membrane fusion, a characteristic feature of arenavirus 
entry. This reaction is inhibited by arenavirus-specific monoclonal antibodies 
and small-molecule fusion inhibitors. The in vitro reconstitution of 
GPC-mediated membrane-fusion activity offers unprecedented opportunities for 
biochemical and structural studies of arenavirus entry and its inhibition. To 
our knowledge, this report is the first to demonstrate functional reconstitution 
of membrane fusion by a viral envelope glycoprotein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051114
PMCID: PMC3511403
PMID: 23226473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.