1. J Virol. 2014 Jan;88(1):643-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02110-13. Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Sodium hydrogen exchangers contribute to arenavirus cell entry.

Iwasaki M(1), Ngo N, de la Torre JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Several arenaviruses, chiefly Lassa virus (LASV), cause hemorrhagic fever (HF) 
disease in humans and pose a great public health concern in the regions in which 
they are endemic. Moreover, evidence indicates that the worldwide-distributed 
prototypic arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is a neglected 
human pathogen of clinical significance. The limited existing armamentarium to 
combat human-pathogenic arenaviruses underscores the importance of developing 
novel antiarenaviral drugs, a task that would be facilitated by the 
identification and characterization of virus-host cell factor interactions that 
contribute to the arenavirus life cycle. A genome-wide small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) screen identified sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 (NHE3) as required for 
efficient multiplication of LCMV in HeLa cells, but the mechanisms by which NHE 
activity contributed to the life cycle of LCMV remain unknown. Here we show that 
treatment with the NHE inhibitor 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl) amiloride (EIPA) 
resulted in a robust inhibition of LCMV multiplication in both rodent (BHK-21) 
and human (A549) cells. EIPA-mediated inhibition was due not to interference 
with virus RNA replication, gene expression, or budding but rather to a blockade 
of virus cell entry. EIPA also inhibited cell entry mediated by the 
glycoproteins of the HF arenaviruses LASV and Junin virus (JUNV). 
Pharmacological and genetic studies revealed that cell entry of LCMV in A549 
cells depended on actin remodeling and Pak1, suggesting a macropinocytosis-like 
cell entry pathway. Finally, zoniporide, an NHE inhibitor being explored as a 
therapeutic agent to treat myocardial infarction, inhibited LCMV propagation in 
culture cells. Our findings indicate that targeting NHEs could be a novel 
strategy to combat human-pathogenic arenaviruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02110-13
PMCID: PMC3911747
PMID: 24173224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]