1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Aug;69(8):2123-31. doi: 10.1093/jac/dku091. Epub 
2014 Apr 7.

The clinically approved drugs amiodarone, dronedarone and verapamil inhibit 
filovirus cell entry.

Gehring G(1), Rohrmann K(2), Atenchong N(1), Mittler E(3), Becker S(3), Dahlmann 
F(4), Pöhlmann S(4), Vondran FW(5), David S(6), Manns MP(7), Ciesek S(7), von 
Hahn T(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany 
Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Institute for Virology, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(4)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(8)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany 
Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany vonhahn.thomas@mh-hannover.de.

OBJECTIVES: Filoviruses such as Ebola virus and Marburg virus cause a severe 
haemorrhagic fever syndrome in humans for which there is no specific treatment. 
Since filoviruses use a complex route of cell entry that depends on numerous 
cellular factors, we hypothesized that there may be drugs already approved for 
human use for other indications that interfere with signal transduction or other 
cellular processes required for their entry and hence have anti-filoviral 
properties.
METHODS: We used authentic filoviruses and lentiviral particles pseudotyped with 
filoviral glycoproteins to identify and characterize such compounds.
RESULTS: We discovered that amiodarone, a multi-ion channel inhibitor and 
adrenoceptor antagonist, is a potent inhibitor of filovirus cell entry at 
concentrations that are routinely reached in human serum during anti-arrhythmic 
therapy. A similar effect was observed with the amiodarone-related agent 
dronedarone and the L-type calcium channel blocker verapamil. Inhibition by 
amiodarone was concentration dependent and similarly affected pseudoviruses as 
well as authentic filoviruses. Inhibition of filovirus entry was observed with 
most but not all cell types tested and was accentuated by the pre-treatment of 
cells, indicating a host cell-directed mechanism of action. The New World 
arenavirus Guanarito was also inhibited by amiodarone while the Old World 
arenavirus Lassa and members of the Rhabdoviridae (vesicular stomatitis virus) 
and Bunyaviridae (Hantaan) families were largely resistant.
CONCLUSIONS: The ion channel blockers amiodarone, dronedarone and verapamil 
inhibit filoviral cell entry.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dku091
PMCID: PMC7110251
PMID: 24710028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]