1. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(15):8340-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00236-14. Epub 2014 May 14.

Evolution of recombinant lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus/Lassa virus in vivo 
highlights the importance of the GPC cytosolic tail in viral fitness.

Sommerstein R(1), Ramos da Palma J(2), Olschläger S(3), Bergthaler A(1), Barba 
L(3), Lee BP(1), Pasquato A(2), Flatz L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, University Hospital CHUV and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland 
lukas.flatz@gmail.com.

A key characteristic of arenaviruses is their ability to establish persistent 
infection in their natural host. Different factors like host age, viral dose 
strain, and route of infection may contribute to the establishment of 
persistence. However, the molecular mechanisms governing persistence are not 
fully understood. Here, we describe gain-of-function mutations of lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) expressing Lassa virus (LASV) GP, which can 
prolong viremia in mice depending on the sequences in the GP-2 cytoplasmic tail. 
The initial mutant variant (rLCMV/LASV mut GP) carried a point mutation in the 
cytosolic tail of the LASV glycoprotein GP corresponding to a K461G 
substitution. Unlike what occurred with the original rLCMV/LASV wild-type (wt) 
GP, infection of C57BL/6 mice with the mutated recombinant virus led to a 
detectable viremia of 2 weeks' duration. Further replacement of the entire 
sequence of the cytosolic tail from LASV to LCMV GP resulted in increased viral 
titers and delayed clearance of the viruses. Biosynthesis and cell surface 
localization of LASV wt and mut GPs were comparable.
IMPORTANCE: Starting from an emerging virus in a wild-type mouse, we engineered 
a panel of chimeric Lassa/lymphocytic choriomeningitis viruses. Mutants carrying 
a viral envelope with the cytosolic tail from the closely related mouse-adapted 
LCMV were able to achieve a productive viral infection lasting up to 27 days in 
wild-type mice. Biochemical assays showed a comparable biosynthesis and cell 
surface localization of LASV wt and mut GPs. These recombinant chimeric viruses 
could allow the study of immune responses and antivirals targeting the LASV GP.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00236-14
PMCID: PMC4135970
PMID: 24829355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]