1. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(15):8556-64. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01133-14. Epub 2014 May 21.

Inhibition of arenavirus infection by a glycoprotein-derived peptide with a 
novel mechanism.

Spence JS(1), Melnik LI(1), Badani H(2), Wimley WC(2), Garry RF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA rfgarry@tulane.edu.

The family Arenaviridae includes a number of viruses of public health 
importance, such as the category A hemorrhagic fever viruses Lassa virus, Junin 
virus, Machupo virus, Guanarito virus, and Sabia virus. Current chemotherapy for 
arenavirus infection is limited to the nucleoside analogue ribavirin, which is 
characterized by considerable toxicity and treatment failure. Using Pichinde 
virus as a model arenavirus, we attempted to design glycoprotein-derived fusion 
inhibitors similar to the FDA-approved anti-HIV peptide enfuvirtide. We have 
identified a GP2-derived peptide, AVP-p, with antiviral activity and no acute 
cytotoxicity. The 50% inhibitory dose (IC50) for the peptide is 7 μM, with 
complete inhibition of viral plaque formation at approximately 20 μM, and its 
antiviral activity is largely sequence dependent. AVP-p demonstrates activity 
against viruses with the Old and New World arenavirus viral glycoprotein complex 
but not against enveloped viruses of other families. Unexpectedly, fusion assays 
reveal that the peptide induces virus-liposome fusion at neutral pH and that the 
process is strictly glycoprotein mediated. As observed in cryo-electron 
micrographs, AVP-p treatment causes morphological changes consistent with fusion 
protein activation in virions, including the disappearance of prefusion 
glycoprotein spikes and increased particle diameters, and fluorescence 
microscopy shows reduced binding by peptide-treated virus. Steady-state 
fluorescence anisotropy measurements suggest that glycoproteins are destabilized 
by peptide-induced alterations in viral membrane order. We conclude that 
untimely deployment of fusion machinery by the peptide could render virions less 
able to engage in on-pathway receptor binding or endosomal fusion. AVP-p may 
represent a potent, highly specific, novel therapeutic strategy for arenavirus 
infection.
IMPORTANCE: Because the only drug available to combat infection by Lassa virus, 
a highly pathogenic arenavirus, is toxic and prone to treatment failure, we 
identified a peptide, AVP-p, derived from the fusion glycoprotein of a 
nonpathogenic model arenavirus, which demonstrates antiviral activity and no 
acute cytotoxicity. AVP-p is unique among self-derived inhibitory peptides in 
that it shows broad, specific activity against pseudoviruses bearing Old and New 
World arenavirus glycoproteins but not against viruses from other families. 
Further, the peptide's mechanism of action is highly novel. Biochemical assays 
and cryo-electron microscopy indicate that AVP-p induces premature activation of 
viral fusion proteins through membrane perturbance. Peptide treatment, however, 
does not increase the infectivity of cell-bound virus. We hypothesize that 
prematurely activated virions are less fit for receptor binding and membrane 
fusion and that AVP-p may represent a viable therapeutic strategy for arenavirus 
infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01133-14
PMCID: PMC4135937
PMID: 24850726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]