1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014;10(10):3022-38. doi: 10.4161/hv.34413.

VaxCelerate II: rapid development of a self-assembling vaccine for Lassa fever.

Leblanc P(1), Moise L, Luza C, Chantaralawan K, Lezeau L, Yuan J, Field M, 
Richer D, Boyle C, Martin WD, Fishman JB, Berg EA, Baker D, Zeigler B, Mais DE, 
Taylor W, Coleman R, Warren HS, Gelfand JA, De Groot AS, Brauns T, Poznansky MC.

Author information:
(1)a Vaccine and Immunotherapy Center; Massachusetts General Hospital ; 
Charlestown , MA USA.

Development of effective vaccines against emerging infectious diseases (EID) can 
take as much or more than a decade to progress from pathogen 
isolation/identification to clinical approval. As a result, conventional 
approaches fail to produce field-ready vaccines before the EID has spread 
extensively. Lassa is a prototypical emerging infectious disease endemic to West 
Africa for which no successful vaccine is available. We established the 
VaxCelerate Consortium to address the need for more rapid vaccine development by 
creating a platform capable of generating and pre-clinically testing a new 
vaccine against specific pathogen targets in less than 120 d A self-assembling 
vaccine is at the core of the approach. It consists of a fusion protein composed 
of the immunostimulatory Mycobacterium tuberculosis heat shock protein 70 
(MtbHSP70) and the biotin binding protein, avidin. Mixing the resulting protein 
(MAV) with biotinylated pathogen-specific immunogenic peptides yields a 
self-assembled vaccine (SAV). To meet the time constraint imposed on this 
project, we used a distributed R&D model involving experts in the fields of 
protein engineering and production, bioinformatics, peptide synthesis/design and 
GMP/GLP manufacturing and testing standards. SAV immunogenicity was first tested 
using H1N1 influenza specific peptides and the entire VaxCelerate process was 
then tested in a mock live-fire exercise targeting Lassa fever virus. We 
demonstrated that the Lassa fever vaccine induced significantly increased class 
II peptide specific interferon-γ CD4(+) T cell responses in HLA-DR3 transgenic 
mice compared to peptide or MAV alone controls. We thereby demonstrated that our 
SAV in combination with a distributed development model may facilitate 
accelerated regulatory review by using an identical design for each vaccine and 
by applying safety and efficacy assessment tools that are more relevant to human 
vaccine responses than current animal models.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.34413
PMCID: PMC5443105
PMID: 25483693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]