1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Apr 17;9(4):e0003736. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0003736. eCollection 2015 Apr.

A recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus-based Lassa fever vaccine protects 
guinea pigs and macaques against challenge with geographically and genetically 
distinct Lassa viruses.

Safronetz D(1), Mire C(2), Rosenke K(1), Feldmann F(3), Haddock E(1), Geisbert 
T(2), Feldmann H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, Rocky Mountain 
Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of America.
(2)Galveston National Laboratory and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, Division of Intramural Research, Rocky 
Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Lassa virus (LASV) is endemic in several West African countries and 
is the etiological agent of Lassa fever. Despite the high annual incidence and 
significant morbidity and mortality rates, currently there are no approved 
vaccines to prevent infection or disease in humans. Genetically, LASV 
demonstrates a high degree of diversity that correlates with geographic 
distribution. The genetic heterogeneity observed between geographically distinct 
viruses raises concerns over the potential efficacy of a "universal" LASV 
vaccine. To date, several experimental LASV vaccines have been developed; 
however, few have been evaluated against challenge with various genetically 
unique Lassa virus isolates in relevant animal models.
METHODOLOGIES/PRINCIPLE FINDINGS: Here we demonstrate that a single, 
prophylactic immunization with a recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) 
expressing the glycoproteins of LASV strain Josiah from Sierra Leone protects 
strain 13 guinea pigs from infection / disease following challenge with LASV 
isolates originating from Liberia, Mali and Nigeria. Similarly, the VSV-based 
LASV vaccine yields complete protection against a lethal challenge with the 
Liberian LASV isolate in the gold-standard macaque model of Lassa fever.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results demonstrate the VSV-based LASV vaccine is 
capable of preventing morbidity and mortality associated with non-homologous 
LASV challenge in two animal models of Lassa fever. Additionally, this work 
highlights the need for the further development of disease models for 
geographical distinct LASV strains, particularly those from Nigeria, in order to 
comprehensively evaluate potential vaccines and therapies against this prominent 
agent of viral hemorrhagic fever.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003736
PMCID: PMC4401668
PMID: 25884628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.