1. J Virol. 2015 Aug;89(15):7584-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00651-15. Epub 2015 May 13.

Molecular Mechanism for LAMP1 Recognition by Lassa Virus.

Cohen-Dvashi H(1), Cohen N(1), Israeli H(1), Diskin R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel ron.diskin@weizmann.ac.il.

Lassa virus is a notorious human pathogen that infects many thousands of people 
each year in West Africa, causing severe viral hemorrhagic fevers and 
significant mortality. The surface glycoprotein of Lassa virus mediates receptor 
recognition through its GP1 subunit. Here we report the crystal structure of GP1 
from Lassa virus, which is the first representative GP1 structure for Old World 
arenaviruses. We identify a unique triad of histidines that forms a binding site 
for LAMP1, a known lysosomal protein recently discovered to be a critical 
receptor for internalized Lassa virus at acidic pH. We demonstrate that mutation 
of this histidine triad, which is highly conserved among Old World arenaviruses, 
impairs LAMP1 recognition. Our biochemical and structural data further suggest 
that GP1 from Lassa virus may undergo irreversible conformational changes that 
could serve as an immunological decoy mechanism. Together with a variable region 
that we identify on the surface of GP1, those could be two distinct mechanisms 
that Lassa virus utilizes to avoid antibody-based immune response.
IMPORTANCE: Structural data at atomic resolution for viral proteins is key for 
understanding their function at the molecular level and can facilitate novel 
avenues for combating viral infections. Here we used X-ray protein 
crystallography to decipher the crystal structure of the receptor-binding domain 
(GP1) from Lassa virus. This is a pathogenic virus that causes significant 
illness and mortality in West Africa. This structure reveals the overall 
architecture of GP1 domains from the group of viruses known as the Old World 
arenaviruses. Using this structural information, we elucidated the mechanisms 
for pH switch and binding of Lassa virus to LAMP1, a recently identified host 
receptor that is critical for successful infection. Lastly, our structural 
analysis suggests two novel immune evasion mechanisms that Lassa virus may 
utilize to escape antibody-based immune response.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00651-15
PMCID: PMC4505663
PMID: 25972533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]