1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Nov 20;11(11):e1005276. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005276. 
eCollection 2015 Nov.

Arenavirus Glycan Shield Promotes Neutralizing Antibody Evasion and Protracted 
Infection.

Sommerstein R(1)(2), Flatz L(1), Remy MM(1)(3), Malinge P(4), Magistrelli G(4), 
Fischer N(4), Sahin M(3), Bergthaler A(1), Igonet S(5), Ter Meulen J(6), Rigo 
D(7), Meda P(7), Rabah N(8), Coutard B(8), Bowden TA(9), Lambert PH(1)(2), 
Siegrist CA(1)(2), Pinschewer DD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(2)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Vaccine Immunology, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Experimental Virology, Department of Biomedicine, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Novimmune SA, Plan-Les-Ouates, Switzerland.
(5)Institut Pasteur, Département de Virologie, Unité de Virologie Structurale 
and CNRS UMR 3569 Virologie, Paris, France.
(6)Institute of Virology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(8)AFMB, UMR7257 CNRS/Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(9)Division of Structural Biology, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Arenaviruses such as Lassa virus (LASV) can cause severe hemorrhagic fever in 
humans. As a major impediment to vaccine development, delayed and weak 
neutralizing antibody (nAb) responses represent a unifying characteristic of 
both natural infection and all vaccine candidates tested to date. To investigate 
the mechanisms underlying arenavirus nAb evasion we engineered several 
arenavirus envelope-chimeric viruses and glycan-deficient variants thereof. We 
performed neutralization tests with sera from experimentally infected mice and 
from LASV-convalescent human patients. NAb response kinetics in mice correlated 
inversely with the N-linked glycan density in the arenavirus envelope protein's 
globular head. Additionally and most intriguingly, infection with fully 
glycosylated viruses elicited antibodies, which neutralized predominantly their 
glycan-deficient variants, both in mice and humans. Binding studies with 
monoclonal antibodies indicated that envelope glycans reduced nAb on-rate, 
occupancy and thereby counteracted virus neutralization. In infected mice, the 
envelope glycan shield promoted protracted viral infection by preventing its 
timely elimination by the ensuing antibody response. Thus, arenavirus envelope 
glycosylation impairs the protective efficacy rather than the induction of nAbs, 
and thereby prevents efficient antibody-mediated virus control. This immune 
evasion mechanism imposes limitations on antibody-based vaccination and 
convalescent serum therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005276
PMCID: PMC4654586
PMID: 26587982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: LF, AB and DDP are 
shareholders and DDP also is a consultant to Hookipa Biotech AG commercializing 
arenavirus-based vector technology. LF, AB as well as DDP are listed as 
inventors on a related patent. PHL acts as a consultant and supervisory board 
member of Hookipa Biotech AG. The remaining authors declare no competing 
financial interests. This does not alter our adherence to all PLOS policies on 
sharing data and materials.