1. J Virol. 2016 Jun 24;90(14):6412-6429. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00257-16. Print 2016
Jul  15.

Lassa Virus Cell Entry via Dystroglycan Involves an Unusual Pathway of 
Macropinocytosis.

Oppliger J(1), Torriani G(1), Herrador A(1), Kunz S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital, and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital, and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Stefan.Kunz@chuv.ch.

The pathogenic Old World arenavirus Lassa virus (LASV) causes a severe 
hemorrhagic fever with a high rate of mortality in humans. Several LASV 
receptors, including dystroglycan (DG), TAM receptor tyrosine kinases, and 
C-type lectins, have been identified, suggesting complex receptor use. Upon 
receptor binding, LASV enters the host cell via an unknown clathrin- and 
dynamin-independent pathway that delivers the virus to late endosomes, where 
fusion occurs. Here we investigated the mechanisms underlying LASV endocytosis 
in human cells in the context of productive arenavirus infection, using 
recombinant lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (rLCMV) expressing the LASV 
glycoprotein (rLCMV-LASVGP). We found that rLCMV-LASVGP entered human epithelial 
cells via DG using a macropinocytosis-related pathway independently of 
alternative receptors. Dystroglycan-mediated entry of rLCMV-LASVGP required 
sodium hydrogen exchangers, actin, and the GTPase Cdc42 and its downstream 
targets, p21-activating kinase-1 (PAK1) and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein 
(N-Wasp). Unlike other viruses that enter cells via macropinocytosis, 
rLCMV-LASVGP entry did not induce overt changes in cellular morphology and 
hardly affected actin dynamics or fluid uptake. Screening of kinase inhibitors 
identified protein kinase C, phosphoinositide 3-kinase, and the receptor 
tyrosine kinase human hepatocyte growth factor receptor (HGFR) to be regulators 
of rLCMV-LASVGP entry. The HGFR inhibitor EMD 1214063, a candidate anticancer 
drug, showed antiviral activity against rLCMV-LASVGP at the level of entry. When 
combined with ribavirin, which is currently used to treat human arenavirus 
infection, EMD 1214063 showed additive antiviral effects. In sum, our study 
reveals that DG can link LASV to an unusual pathway of macropinocytosis that 
causes only minimal perturbation of the host cell and identifies cellular 
kinases to be possible novel targets for therapeutic intervention.
IMPORTANCE: Lassa virus (LASV) causes several hundred thousand infections per 
year in Western Africa, with the mortality rate among hospitalized patients 
being high. The current lack of a vaccine and the limited therapeutic options at 
hand make the development of new drugs against LASV a high priority. In the 
present study, we uncover that LASV entry into human cells via its major 
receptor, dystroglycan, involves an unusual pathway of macropinocytosis and 
define a set of cellular factors implicated in the regulation of LASV entry. A 
screen of kinase inhibitors revealed HGFR to be a possible candidate target for 
antiviral drugs against LASV. An HGFR candidate inhibitor currently being 
evaluated for cancer treatment showed potent antiviral activity and additive 
drug effects with ribavirin, which is used in the clinic to treat human LASV 
infection. In sum, our study reveals novel fundamental aspects of the LASV-host 
cell interaction and highlights a possible candidate drug target for therapeutic 
intervention.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00257-16
PMCID: PMC4936151
PMID: 27147735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]