1. J Virol. 2016 Jul 11;90(15):6799-807. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00597-16. Print 2016
Aug  1.

Small-Molecule Fusion Inhibitors Bind the pH-Sensing Stable Signal Peptide-GP2 
Subunit Interface of the Lassa Virus Envelope Glycoprotein.

Shankar S(1), Whitby LR(2), Casquilho-Gray HE(3), York J(3), Boger DL(2), 
Nunberg JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Montana Biotechnology Center, The University of Montana, Missoula, Montana, 
USA Division of Biological Sciences, The University of Montana, Missoula, 
Montana, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The 
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Montana Biotechnology Center, The University of Montana, Missoula, Montana, 
USA.
(4)Montana Biotechnology Center, The University of Montana, Missoula, Montana, 
USA jack.nunberg@umontana.edu.

Arenavirus species are responsible for severe life-threatening hemorrhagic 
fevers in western Africa and South America. Without effective antiviral 
therapies or vaccines, these viruses pose serious public health and biodefense 
concerns. Chemically distinct small-molecule inhibitors of arenavirus entry have 
recently been identified and shown to act on the arenavirus envelope 
glycoprotein (GPC) to prevent membrane fusion. In the tripartite GPC complex, 
pH-dependent membrane fusion is triggered through a poorly understood 
interaction between the stable signal peptide (SSP) and the transmembrane fusion 
subunit GP2, and our genetic studies have suggested that these small-molecule 
inhibitors act at this interface to antagonize fusion activation. Here, we have 
designed and synthesized photoaffinity derivatives of the 
4-acyl-1,6-dialkylpiperazin-2-one class of fusion inhibitors and demonstrate 
specific labeling of both the SSP and GP2 subunits in a native-like Lassa virus 
(LASV) GPC trimer expressed in insect cells. Photoaddition is competed by the 
parental inhibitor and other chemically distinct compounds active against LASV, 
but not those specific to New World arenaviruses. These studies provide direct 
physical evidence that these inhibitors bind at the SSP-GP2 interface. We also 
find that GPC containing the uncleaved GP1-GP2 precursor is not susceptible to 
photo-cross-linking, suggesting that proteolytic maturation is accompanied by 
conformational changes at this site. Detailed mapping of residues modified by 
the photoaffinity adducts may provide insight to guide the further development 
of these promising lead compounds as potential therapeutic agents to treat Lassa 
hemorrhagic fever.
IMPORTANCE: Hemorrhagic fever arenaviruses cause lethal infections in humans 
and, in the absence of licensed vaccines or specific antiviral therapies, are 
recognized to pose significant threats to public health and biodefense. Lead 
small-molecule inhibitors that target the arenavirus envelope glycoprotein (GPC) 
have recently been identified and shown to block GPC-mediated fusion of the 
viral and cellular endosomal membranes, thereby preventing virus entry into the 
host cell. Genetic studies suggest that these inhibitors act through a unique 
pH-sensing intersubunit interface in GPC, but atomic-level structural 
information is unavailable. In this report, we utilize novel photoreactive 
fusion inhibitors and photoaffinity labeling to obtain direct physical evidence 
for inhibitor binding at this critical interface in Lassa virus GPC. Future 
identification of modified residues at the inhibitor-binding site will help 
elucidate the molecular basis for fusion activation and its inhibition and guide 
the development of effective therapies to treat arenaviral hemorrhagic fevers.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00597-16
PMCID: PMC4944282
PMID: 27194767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]