1. Virology. 2017 Dec;512:161-171. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2017.09.013. Epub 2017
Sep  28.

Oxidation-sensitive polymersomes as vaccine nanocarriers enhance humoral 
responses against Lassa virus envelope glycoprotein.

Galan-Navarro C(1), Rincon-Restrepo M(2), Zimmer G(3), Saphire EO(4), Hubbell 
JA(5), Hirosue S(6), Swartz MA(7), Kunz S(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital. Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Laboratory of Lymphatic and Cancer Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Féderal de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Lymphatic and Cancer Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Féderal de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Division of Virology, Institute of Virology and Immunology, 3147 
Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA, United States; Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(5)Laboratory of Lymphatic and Cancer Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Féderal de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Institute for Molecular Engineering and Ben May Department of 
Cancer Research, University of Chicago, IL, United States.
(6)Laboratory of Lymphatic and Cancer Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Féderal de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: sach@alum.mit.edu.
(7)Laboratory of Lymphatic and Cancer Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Féderal de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Institute for Molecular Engineering and Ben May Department of 
Cancer Research, University of Chicago, IL, United States. Electronic address: 
melodyswartz@uchicago.edu.
(8)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital. Lausanne, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: Stefan.Kunz@chuv.ch.

Lassa virus (LASV) causes severe hemorrhagic fever with high mortality, yet no 
vaccine currently exists. Antibodies targeting viral attachment proteins are 
crucial for protection against many viral infections. However, the envelope 
glycoprotein (GP)-1 of LASV elicits weak antibody responses due to extensive 
glycan shielding. Here, we explored a novel vaccine strategy to enhance humoral 
immunity against LASV GP1. Using structural information, we designed a 
recombinant GP1 immunogen, and then encapsulated it into oxidation-sensitive 
polymersomes (PS) as nanocarriers that promote intracellular MHCII loading. Mice 
immunized with adjuvanted PS (LASV GP1) showed superior humoral responses than 
free LASV GP1, including antibodies with higher binding affinity to virion GP1, 
increased levels of polyfunctional anti-viral CD4 T cells, and IgG-secreting B 
cells. PS (LASV GP1) elicited a more diverse epitope repertoire of anti-viral 
IgG. Together, these data demonstrate the potential of our nanocarrier vaccine 
platform for generating virus-specific antibodies against weakly immunogenic 
viral antigens.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2017.09.013
PMID: 28963882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]