1. J Virol. 2018 Feb 12;92(5):e01613-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01613-17. Print 2018
Mar  1.

Axl Can Serve as Entry Factor for Lassa Virus Depending on the Functional 
Glycosylation of Dystroglycan.

Fedeli C(#)(1), Torriani G(#)(1), Galan-Navarro C(1)(2), Moraz ML(1), Moreno 
H(1), Gerold G(3), Kunz S(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Lymphatic and Cancer Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Féderale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)TWINCORE, Center for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Institute 
for Experimental Virology, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland Stefan.Kunz@chuv.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Fatal infection with the highly pathogenic Lassa virus (LASV) is characterized 
by extensive viral dissemination, indicating broad tissue tropism. The major 
cellular receptor for LASV is the highly conserved extracellular matrix receptor 
dystroglycan (DG). Binding of LASV depends on DG's tissue-specific 
posttranslational modification with the unusual O-linked polysaccharide 
matriglycan. Interestingly, functional glycosylation of DG does not always 
correlate with viral tropism observed in vivo The broadly expressed 
phosphatidylserine (PS) receptors Axl and Tyro3 were recently identified as 
alternative LASV receptor candidates. However, their role in LASV entry is not 
entirely understood. Here, we examine LASV receptor candidates in primary human 
cells and found coexpression of Axl with differentially glycosylated DG. To 
study LASV receptor use in the context of productive arenavirus infection, we 
employed recombinant lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus expressing LASV 
glycoprotein (rLCMV-LASV GP) as a validated biosafety level 2 (BSL2) model. We 
confirm and extend previous work showing that Axl can contribute to LASV entry 
in the absence of functional DG using "apoptotic mimicry" in a way similar to 
that of other enveloped viruses. We further show that Axl-dependent LASV entry 
requires receptor activation and involves a pathway resembling macropinocytosis. 
Axl-mediated LASV entry is facilitated by heparan sulfate and critically depends 
on the late endosomal protein LAMP-1 as an intracellular entry factor. In 
endothelial cells expressing low levels of functional DG, both receptors are 
engaged by the virus and can contribute to productive entry. In sum, we 
characterize the role of Axl in LASV entry and provide a rationale for targeting 
Axl in antiviral therapy.IMPORTANCE The highly pathogenic arenavirus Lassa virus 
(LASV) represents a serious public health problem in Africa. Although the 
principal LASV receptor, dystroglycan (DG), is ubiquitously expressed, virus 
binding critically depends on DG's posttranslational modification, which does 
not always correlate with tissue tropism. The broadly expressed 
phosphatidylserine receptor Axl was recently identified as an alternative LASV 
receptor candidate, but its role in LASV entry is unclear. Here, we investigate 
the exact role of Axl in LASV entry as a function of DG's posttranslational 
modification. We found that in the absence of functional DG, Axl can mediate 
LASV entry via apoptotic mimicry. Productive entry requires virus-induced 
receptor activation, involves macropinocytosis, and critically depends on 
LAMP-1. In endothelial cells that express low levels of glycosylated DG, both 
receptors can promote LASV entry. In sum, our study defines the roles of Axl in 
LASV entry and provides a rationale for targeting Axl in antiviral therapy.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01613-17
PMCID: PMC5809728
PMID: 29237830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]