1. Vaccine. 2018 Jan 29;36(5):683-690. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.12.046. Epub 
2017 Dec 26.

Alphavirus vector-based replicon particles expressing multivalent 
cross-protective Lassa virus glycoproteins.

Wang M(1), Jokinen J(1), Tretyakova I(2), Pushko P(2), Lukashevich IS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Center for 
Predictive Medicine for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, NIH 
Regional Bio-containment Laboratory, University of Louisville, KY, USA.
(2)Medigen, Inc., Frederick, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Center for 
Predictive Medicine for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, NIH 
Regional Bio-containment Laboratory, University of Louisville, KY, USA. 
Electronic address: isluka01@louisville.edu.

Lassa virus (LASV) is the most prevalent rodent-borne arenavirus circulated in 
West Africa. With population at risk from Senegal to Nigeria, LASV causes Lassa 
fever and is responsible for thousands of deaths annually. High genetic 
diversity of LASV is one of the challenges for vaccine R&D. We developed 
multivalent virus-like particle vectors (VLPVs) derived from the human 
Venezuelan equine encephalitis TC-83 IND vaccine (VEEV) as the next generation 
of alphavirus-based bicistronic RNA replicon particles. The genes encoding VEEV 
structural proteins were replaced with LASV glycoproteins (GPC) from distantly 
related clades I and IV with individual 26S promoters. Bicistronic RNA replicons 
encoding wild-type LASV GPC (GPCwt) and C-terminally deleted, non-cleavable 
modified glycoprotein (ΔGPfib), were encapsidated into VLPV particles using VEEV 
capsid and glycoproteins provided in trans. In transduced cells, VLPVs induced 
simultaneous expression of LASV GPCwt and ΔGPfib from 26S alphavirus promoters. 
LASV ΔGPfib was predominantly expressed as trimers, accumulated in the 
endoplasmic reticulum, induced ER stress and apoptosis promoting antigen 
cross-priming. VLPV vaccines were immunogenic and protective in mice and 
upregulated CD11c+/CD8+ dendritic cells playing the major role in 
cross-presentation. Notably, VLPV vaccination resulted in induction of 
cross-reactive multifunctional T cell responses after stimulation of immune 
splenocytes with peptide cocktails derived from LASV from clades I-IV. 
Multivalent RNA replicon-based LASV vaccines can be applicable for first 
responders, international travelers visiting endemic areas, military and lab 
personnel.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.12.046
PMCID: PMC5806529
PMID: 29287681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no other relevant affiliations 
or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial 
interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed 
in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.