1. mBio. 2018 Jan 2;9(1):e01818-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01818-17.

Lamp1 Increases the Efficiency of Lassa Virus Infection by Promoting Fusion in 
Less Acidic Endosomal Compartments.

Hulseberg CE(1), Fénéant L(2), Szymańska KM(2), White JM(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA jw7g@virginia.edu.

Lassa virus (LASV) is an arenavirus whose entry into host cells is mediated by a 
glycoprotein complex (GPC) comprised of a receptor binding subunit, GP1, a 
fusogenic transmembrane subunit, GP2, and a stable signal peptide. After 
receptor-mediated internalization, arenaviruses converge in the endocytic 
pathway, where they are thought to undergo low-pH-triggered, GPC-mediated fusion 
with a late endosome membrane. A unique feature of LASV entry is a pH-dependent 
switch from a primary cell surface receptor (α-dystroglycan) to an endosomal 
receptor, lysosomal-associated membrane protein (Lamp1). Despite evidence that 
the interaction between LASV GP1 and Lamp1 is critical, the function of Lamp1 in 
promoting LASV infection remains poorly characterized. Here we used wild-type 
(WT) and Lamp1 knockout (KO) cells to show that Lamp1 increases the efficiency 
of, but is not absolutely required for, LASV entry and infection. We then used 
cell-cell and pseudovirus-cell surface fusion assays to demonstrate that LASV 
GPC-mediated fusion occurs at a significantly higher pH when Lamp1 is present 
compared to when Lamp1 is missing. Correspondingly, we found that LASV entry 
occurs through less acidic endosomes in WT (Lamp1-positive) versus Lamp1 KO 
cells. We propose that, by elevating the pH threshold for fusion, Lamp1 allows 
LASV particles to exit the endocytic pathway before they encounter an 
increasingly acidic and harsh proteolytic environment, which could inactivate a 
significant percentage of incoming viruses. In this manner Lamp1 increases the 
overall efficiency of LASV entry and infection.IMPORTANCE Lassa virus is the 
most clinically important member of the Arenaviridae, a family that includes six 
additional biosafety level 4 (BSL4) hemorrhagic fever viruses. The lack of 
specific antiviral therapies for Lassa fever drives an urgent need to identify 
druggable targets, and interventions that block infection at the entry stage are 
particularly attractive. Lassa virus is only the second virus known to employ an 
intracellular receptor, the first being Ebola virus. Here we show that 
interaction with its intracellular receptor, Lamp1, enhances and upwardly shifts 
the pH dependence of fusion and consistently permits Lassa virus entry into 
cells through less acidic endosomes. We propose that in this manner, Lamp1 
increases the overall efficiency of Lassa virus infection.

Copyright © 2018 Hulseberg et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01818-17
PMCID: PMC5750398
PMID: 29295909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]