1. mSphere. 2018 May 2;3(3):e00189-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00189-18. eCollection
 2018 May-Jun.

Antibodies to the Glycoprotein GP2 Subunit Cross-React between Old and New World 
Arenaviruses.

Amanat F(1), Duehr J(1)(2), Oestereich L(3)(4), Hastie KM(5), Saphire EO(5)(6), 
Krammer F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Virology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Hamburg, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA florian.krammer@mssm.edu.

Arenaviruses pose a major public health threat and cause numerous infections in 
humans each year. Although most viruses belonging to this family do not cause 
disease in humans, some arenaviruses, such as Lassa virus and Machupo virus, are 
the etiological agents of lethal hemorrhagic fevers. The absence of a currently 
licensed vaccine and the highly pathogenic nature of these viruses both make the 
necessity of developing viable vaccines and therapeutics all the more urgent. 
Arenaviruses have a single glycoprotein on the surface of virions, the 
glycoprotein complex (GPC), and this protein can be used as a target for vaccine 
development. Here, we describe immunization strategies to generate monoclonal 
antibodies (MAbs) that cross-react between the glycoprotein complexes of both 
Old World and New World arenaviruses. Several monoclonal antibodies isolated 
from immunized mice were highly cross-reactive, binding a range of Old World 
arenavirus glycoproteins, including that of Lassa virus. One such monoclonal 
antibody, KL-AV-2A1, bound to GPCs of both New World and Old World viruses, 
including Lassa and Machupo viruses. These cross-reactive antibodies bound to 
epitopes present on the glycoprotein 2 subunit of the glycoprotein complex, 
which is relatively conserved among arenaviruses. Monoclonal antibodies binding 
to these epitopes, however, did not inhibit viral entry as they failed to 
neutralize a replication-competent vesicular stomatitis virus pseudotyped with 
the Lassa virus glycoprotein complex in vitro In addition, no protection from 
virus challenge was observed in in vivo mouse models. Even so, these monoclonal 
antibodies might still prove to be useful in the development of clinical and 
diagnostic assays.IMPORTANCE Several viruses in the Arenaviridae family infect 
humans and cause severe hemorrhagic fevers which lead to high case fatality 
rates. Due to their pathogenicity and geographic tropisms, these viruses remain 
very understudied. As a result, an effective vaccine or therapy is urgently 
needed. Here, we describe efforts to produce cross-reactive monoclonal 
antibodies that bind to both New and Old World arenaviruses. All of our MAbs 
seem to be nonneutralizing and nonprotective and target subunit 2 of the 
glycoprotein. Due to the lack of reagents such as recombinant glycoproteins and 
antibodies for rapid detection assays, our MAbs could be beneficial as analytic 
and diagnostic tools.

Copyright © 2018 Amanat et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00189-18
PMCID: PMC5932378
PMID: 29720525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]