1. J Virol. 2018 Jul 31;92(16):e00093-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00093-18. Print 2018
Aug  15.

TIM-1 Mediates Dystroglycan-Independent Entry of Lassa Virus.

Brouillette RB(1), Phillips EK(1), Patel R(1), Mahauad-Fernandez W(1), 
Moller-Tank S(1), Rogers KJ(1), Dillard JA(1), Cooney AL(1), Martinez-Sobrido 
L(2), Okeoma C(1), Maury W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 
Iowa, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 
Iowa, USA wendy-maury@uiowa.edu.

Lassa virus (LASV) is an Old World arenavirus responsible for hundreds of 
thousands of infections in West Africa every year. LASV entry into a variety of 
cell types is mediated by interactions with glycosyltransferase LARGE-modified 
O-linked glycans present on the ubiquitous receptor α-dystroglycan (αDG). 
However, cells lacking αDG are permissive to LASV infection, suggesting that 
alternative receptors exist. Previous studies demonstrated that the 
phosphatidylserine (PtdSer)-binding receptors Axl and Tyro3 along with C-type 
lectin receptors mediate αDG-independent entry. Here, we demonstrate that 
another PtdSer receptor, TIM-1, mediates LASV glycoprotein (GP)-pseudotyped 
virion entry into αDG-knocked-out HEK 293T and wild-type (WT) Vero cells, which 
express αDG lacking appropriate glycosylation. To investigate the mechanism by 
which TIM-1 mediates enhancement of entry, we demonstrate that mutagenesis of 
the TIM-1 IgV domain PtdSer-binding pocket abrogated transduction. Furthermore, 
the human TIM-1 IgV domain-binding monoclonal antibody ARD5 blocked transduction 
of pseudovirions bearing LASV GP in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, as we 
showed previously for other viruses that use TIM-1 for entry, a chimeric TIM-1 
protein that substitutes the proline-rich region (PRR) from murine leukemia 
virus envelope (Env) for the mucin-like domain served as a competent receptor. 
These studies provide evidence that, in the absence of a functional αDG, TIM-1 
mediates the entry of LASV pseudoviral particles through interactions of virions 
with the IgV PtdSer-binding pocket of TIM-1.IMPORTANCE PtdSer receptors, such as 
TIM-1, are emerging as critical entry factors for many enveloped viruses. Most 
recently, hepatitis C virus and Zika virus have been added to a growing list. 
PtdSer receptors engage with enveloped viruses through the binding of PtdSer 
embedded in the viral envelope, defining them as GP-independent receptors. This 
GP-independent entry mechanism should effectively mediate the entry of all 
enveloped viruses, yet LASV GP-pseudotyped viruses were previously found to be 
unresponsive to PtdSer receptor enhancement in HEK 293T cells. Here, we 
demonstrate that LASV pseudovirions can utilize the PtdSer receptor TIM-1 but 
only in the absence of appropriately glycosylated α-dystroglycan (αDG), the 
high-affinity cell surface receptor for LASV. Our studies shed light on LASV 
receptor utilization and explain why previous studies performed with 
α-DG-expressing cells did not find that LASV pseudovirions utilize PtdSer 
receptors for virus uptake.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00093-18
PMCID: PMC6069209
PMID: 29875238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]