1. J Virol. 2019 Mar 5;93(6):e01744-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01744-18. Print 2019 Mar
 15.

Identification of Clotrimazole Derivatives as Specific Inhibitors of Arenavirus 
Fusion.

Torriani G(1), Trofimenko E(2), Mayor J(1), Fedeli C(1), Moreno H(1), Michel 
S(2), Heulot M(2), Chevalier N(2), Zimmer G(3)(4), Shrestha N(5), Plattet P(5), 
Engler O(6), Rothenberger S(#)(1)(6), Widmann C(#)(7), Kunz S(#)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Virology and Immunology, Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Division of Neurological Sciences, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Spiez Laboratory, Spiez, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland christian.widmann@unil.ch stefan.kunz@chuv.ch.
(8)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland christian.widmann@unil.ch stefan.kunz@chuv.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Arenaviruses are a large family of emerging enveloped negative-strand RNA 
viruses that include several causative agents of viral hemorrhagic fevers. For 
cell entry, human-pathogenic arenaviruses use different cellular receptors and 
endocytic pathways that converge at the level of acidified late endosomes, where 
the viral envelope glycoprotein mediates membrane fusion. Inhibitors of 
arenavirus entry hold promise for therapeutic antiviral intervention and the 
identification of "druggable" targets is of high priority. Using a recombinant 
vesicular stomatitis virus pseudotype platform, we identified the 
clotrimazole-derivative TRAM-34, a highly selective antagonist of the 
calcium-activated potassium channel KCa3.1, as a specific entry inhibitor for 
arenaviruses. TRAM-34 specifically blocked entry of most arenaviruses, including 
hemorrhagic fever viruses, but not Lassa virus and other enveloped viruses. 
Anti-arenaviral activity was likewise observed with the parental compound 
clotrimazole and the derivative senicapoc, whereas structurally unrelated KCa3.1 
inhibitors showed no antiviral effect. Deletion of KCa3.1 by CRISPR/Cas9 
technology did not affect the antiarenaviral effect of TRAM-34, indicating that 
the observed antiviral effect of clotrimazoles was independent of the known 
pharmacological target. The drug affected neither virus-cell attachment, nor 
endocytosis, suggesting an effect on later entry steps. Employing a quantitative 
cell-cell fusion assay that bypasses endocytosis, we demonstrate that TRAM-34 
specifically inhibits arenavirus-mediated membrane fusion. In sum, we uncover a 
novel antiarenaviral action of clotrimazoles that currently undergo in vivo 
evaluation in the context of other human diseases. Their favorable in vivo 
toxicity profiles and stability opens the possibility to repurpose clotrimazole 
derivatives for therapeutic intervention against human-pathogenic 
arenaviruses.IMPORTANCE Emerging human-pathogenic arenaviruses are causative 
agents of severe hemorrhagic fevers with high mortality and represent serious 
public health problems. The current lack of a licensed vaccine and the limited 
treatment options makes the development of novel antiarenaviral therapeutics an 
urgent need. Using a recombinant pseudotype platform, we uncovered that 
clotrimazole drugs, in particular TRAM-34, specifically inhibit cell entry of a 
range of arenaviruses, including important emerging human pathogens, with the 
exception of Lassa virus. The antiviral effect was independent of the known 
pharmacological drug target and involved inhibition of the unusual membrane 
fusion mechanism of arenaviruses. TRAM-34 and its derivatives currently undergo 
evaluation against a number of human diseases and show favorable toxicity 
profiles and high stability in vivo Our study provides the basis for further 
evaluation of clotrimazole derivatives as antiviral drug candidates. Their 
advanced stage of drug development will facilitate repurposing for therapeutic 
intervention against human-pathogenic arenaviruses.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01744-18
PMCID: PMC6401469
PMID: 30626681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]