1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jan 14;15(1):e1007532. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007532. 
eCollection 2019 Jan.

Interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 blocks fusion of sensitive but not 
resistant viruses by partitioning into virus-carrying endosomes.

Suddala KC(1), Lee CC(1), Meraner P(2), Marin M(1), Markosyan RM(3), Desai 
TM(1), Cohen FS(3), Brass AL(2)(4), Melikyan GB(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of America.
(3)Rush University Medical Center, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
Chicago, IL, United States of America.
(4)Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of America.
(5)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.

Late endosome-resident interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) 
inhibits fusion of diverse viruses, including Influenza A virus (IAV), by a 
poorly understood mechanism. Despite the broad antiviral activity of IFITM3, 
viruses like Lassa virus (LASV), are fully resistant to its inhibitory effects. 
It is currently unclear whether resistance arises from a highly efficient fusion 
machinery that is capable of overcoming IFITM3 restriction or the ability to 
enter from cellular sites devoid of this factor. Here, we constructed and 
validated a functional IFITM3 tagged with EGFP or other fluorescent proteins. 
This breakthrough allowed live cell imaging of virus co-trafficking and fusion 
with endosomal compartments in cells expressing fluorescent IFITM3. Three-color 
single virus and endosome tracking revealed that sensitive (IAV), but not 
resistant (LASV), viruses become trapped within IFITM3-positive endosomes where 
they underwent hemifusion but failed to release their content into the 
cytoplasm. IAV fusion with IFITM3-containing compartments could be rescued by 
amphotericin B treatment, which has been previously shown to antagonize the 
antiviral activity of this protein. By comparison, virtually all LASV particles 
trafficked and fused with endosomes lacking detectable levels of fluorescent 
IFITM3, implying that this virus escapes restriction by utilizing endocytic 
pathways that are distinct from the IAV entry pathways. The importance of virus 
uptake and transport pathways is further reinforced by the observation that LASV 
glycoprotein-mediated cell-cell fusion is inhibited by IFITM3 and other members 
of the IFITM family expressed in target cells. Together, our results strongly 
support a model according to which IFITM3 accumulation at the sites of virus 
fusion is a prerequisite for its antiviral activity and that this protein traps 
viral fusion at a hemifusion stage by preventing the formation of fusion pores. 
We conclude that the ability to utilize alternative endocytic pathways for entry 
confers IFITM3-resistance to otherwise sensitive viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007532
PMCID: PMC6347298
PMID: 30640957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist