1. Antiviral Res. 2019 Mar;163:106-116. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2019.01.006.
Epub  2019 Jan 19.

Assessing cross-reactivity of Junín virus-directed neutralizing antibodies.

Leske A(1), Waßmann I(2), Schnepel K(3), Shifflett K(4), Holzerland J(5), 
Bostedt L(6), Bohn P(7), Mettenleiter TC(8), Briggiler AM(9), Brignone J(10), 
Enria D(11), Cordo SM(12), Hoenen T(13), Groseth A(14).

Author information:
(1)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic address: anne.leske@fli.de.
(2)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic address: 
iw142102@uni-greifswald.de.
(3)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic address: 
kevin.schnepel@uni-rostock.de.
(4)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Hamilton, MT, USA. Electronic address: kyle.shifflett@umconnect.umt.edu.
(5)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic address: julia.holzerland@fli.de.
(6)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic address: linus.bostedt@fli.de.
(7)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic address: 
pb132684@uni-greifswald.de.
(8)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, 
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic 
address: thomasc.mettenleiter@fli.de.
(9)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Virales Humanas, ANLIS, Pergamino, 
Argentina. Electronic address: abriggiler@hotmail.com.
(10)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Virales Humanas, ANLIS, Pergamino, 
Argentina. Electronic address: jbrignone@anlis.gov.ar.
(11)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Virales Humanas, ANLIS, Pergamino, 
Argentina. Electronic address: deliaenria@gmail.com.
(12)Laboratory of Virology, IQUIBICEN-Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address: 
scordo@qb.fcen.uba.ar.
(13)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Hamilton, MT, USA; Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, 
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic 
address: thomas.hoenen@fli.de.
(14)Junior Research Group Arenavirus Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 
Greifswald, Insel Riems, Germany; Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural 
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Hamilton, MT, USA. Electronic address: 
allison.groseth@fli.de.

Arenaviruses cause several viral hemorrhagic fevers endemic to Africa and South 
America. The respective causative agents are classified as biosafety level (BSL) 
4 pathogens. Unlike for most other BSL4 agents, for the New World arenavirus 
Junín virus (JUNV) both a highly effective vaccination (Candid#1) and a 
post-exposure treatment, based on convalescent plasma transfer, are available. 
In particular, neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) represent a key protective 
determinant in JUNV infection, which is supported by the correlation between 
successful passive antibody therapy and the levels of nAbs administered. 
Unfortunately, comparable resources for the management of other closely related 
arenavirus infections are not available. Given the significant challenges 
inherent in studying BSL4 pathogens, our goal was to first assess the 
suitability of a JUNV transcription and replication-competent virus-like 
particle (trVLP) system for measuring virus neutralization under BSL1/2 
conditions. Indeed, we could show that infection with JUNV trVLPs is 
glycoprotein (GP) dependent, that trVLP input has a direct correlation to 
reporter readout, and that these trVLPs can be neutralized by human serum with 
kinetics similar to those obtained using authentic virus. These properties make 
trVLPs suitable for use as a proxy for virus in neutralization assays. Using 
this platform we then evaluated the potential of JUNV nAbs to cross-neutralize 
entry mediated by GPs from other arenaviruses using JUNV (strain Romero)-based 
trVLPs bearing GPs either from other JUNV strains, other closely related New 
World arenaviruses (e.g. Tacaribe, Machupo, Sabiá), or the distantly related 
Lassa virus. While nAbs against the JUNV vaccine strain are also active against 
a range of other JUNV strains, they appear to have little or no capacity to 
neutralize other arenavirus species, suggesting that therapy with whole plasma 
directed against another species is unlikely to be successful and that the 
targeted development of cross-specific monoclonal antibody-based resources is 
likely needed. Such efforts will be supported by the availability of this BSL1/2 
screening platform which provides a rapid and easy means to characterize the 
potency and reactivity of anti-arenavirus neutralizing antibodies against a 
range of arenavirus species.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2019.01.006
PMID: 30668977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]