1. J Virol. 2019 Apr 3;93(8):e00090-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00090-19. Print 2019 Apr
 15.

Differential Antibody-Based Immune Response against Isolated GP1 
Receptor-Binding Domains from Lassa and Junín Viruses.

Borenstein-Katz A(1), Shulman A(1), Hamawi H(2), Leitner O(2), Diskin R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Life Sciences Core Facilities, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel ron.diskin@weizmann.ac.il.

There are two predominant subgroups in the Arenaviridae family of viruses, the 
Old World and the New World viruses, that use distinct cellular receptors for 
entry. While New World viruses typically elicit good neutralizing antibody 
responses, the Old World viruses generally evade such responses. Antibody-based 
immune responses are directed against the glycoprotein spike complexes that 
decorate the viruses. A thick coat of glycans reduces the accessibility of 
antibodies to the surface of spike complexes from Old World viruses, but other 
mechanisms may further hamper the development of efficient humoral responses. 
Specifically, it was suggested that the GP1 receptor-binding module of the Old 
World Lassa virus might help with evasion of the humoral response. Here we 
investigated the immunogenicity of the GP1 domain from Lassa virus and compared 
it to that of the GP1 domain from the New World Junín virus. We found striking 
differences in the ability of antibodies that were developed against these 
immunogens to target the same GP1 receptor-binding domains in the context of the 
native spike complexes. Whereas GP1 from Junín virus elicited productive 
neutralizing responses, GP1 from Lassa virus elicited only nonproductive 
responses. These differences can be rationalized by the conformational changes 
that GP1 from Lassa virus but not GP1 from Junín virus undergoes after 
dissociating from the trimeric spike complex. Hence, shedding of GP1 in the case 
of Lassa virus can indeed serve as a mechanism to subvert the humoral immune 
response. Moreover, the realization that a recombinant protein may be used to 
elicit a productive response against the New World Junín virus may suggest a 
novel and safe way to design future vaccines.IMPORTANCE Some viruses that belong 
to the Arenaviridae family, like Lassa and Junín viruses, are notorious human 
pathogens, which may lead to fatal outcomes when they infect people. It is thus 
important to develop means to combat these viruses. For developing effective 
vaccines, it is vital to understand the basic mechanisms that these viruses 
utilize in order to evade or overcome host immune responses. It was previously 
noted that the GP1 receptor-binding domain from Lassa virus is shed and 
accumulates in the serum of infected individuals. This raised the possibility 
that Lassa virus GP1 may function as an immunological decoy. Here we demonstrate 
that mice develop nonproductive immune responses against GP1 from Lassa virus, 
which is in contrast to the effective neutralizing responses that GP1 from Junín 
virus elicits. Thus, GP1 from Lassa virus is indeed an immunological decoy and 
GP1 from Junín virus may serve as a constituent of a future vaccine.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00090-19
PMCID: PMC6450128
PMID: 30728269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]