1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 11;14(4):e0214968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214968. 
eCollection 2019.

Inhibitors of signal peptide peptidase and subtilisin/kexin-isozyme 1 inhibit 
Ebola virus glycoprotein-driven cell entry by interfering with activity and 
cellular localization of endosomal cathepsins.

Plegge T(1)(2), Spiegel M(1)(3), Krüger N(4)(5), Nehlmeier I(1), Winkler M(1), 
González Hernández M(1)(2), Pöhlmann S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center-Leibniz Institute for Primate 
Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology and Psychology, University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, Brandenburg Medical School Theodor 
Fontane, Senftenberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, 
Germany.
(5)Research Center for Emerging Infections and Zoonoses, University of 
Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Emerging viruses such as severe fever and thrombocytopenia syndrome virus 
(SFTSV) and Ebola virus (EBOV) are responsible for significant morbidity and 
mortality. Host cell proteases that process the glycoproteins of these viruses 
are potential targets for antiviral intervention. The aspartyl protease signal 
peptide peptidase (SPP) has recently been shown to be required for processing of 
the glycoprotein precursor, Gn/Gc, of Bunyamwera virus and for viral 
infectivity. Here, we investigated whether SPP is also required for infectivity 
of particles bearing SFTSV-Gn/Gc. Entry driven by the EBOV glycoprotein (GP) and 
the Lassa virus glycoprotein (LASV-GPC) depends on the cysteine proteases 
cathepsin B and L (CatB/CatL) and the serine protease subtilisin/kexin-isozyme 1 
(SKI-1), respectively, and was examined in parallel for control purposes. We 
found that inhibition of SPP and SKI-1 did not interfere with SFTSV Gn + 
Gc-driven entry but, unexpectedly, blocked entry mediated by EBOV-GP. The 
inhibition occurred at the stage of proteolytic activation and the SPP inhibitor 
was found to block CatL/CatB activity. In contrast, the SKI-1 inhibitor did not 
interfere with CatB/CatL activity but disrupted CatB localization in 
endo/lysosomes, the site of EBOV-GP processing. These results underline the 
potential of protease inhibitors for antiviral therapy but also show that 
previously characterized compounds might exert broader specificity than 
initially appreciated and might block viral entry via diverse mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214968
PMCID: PMC6459477
PMID: 30973897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.