1. Cell. 2019 Aug 8;178(4):1004-1015.e14. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.020.

Convergent Structures Illuminate Features for Germline Antibody Binding and 
Pan-Lassa Virus Neutralization.

Hastie KM(1), Cross RW(2), Harkins SS(1), Zandonatti MA(1), Koval AP(3), 
Heinrich ML(3), Rowland MM(3), Robinson JE(4), Geisbert TW(2), Garry RF(5), 
Branco LM(3), Saphire EO(6).

Author information:
(1)La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA; Department of 
Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston National Laboratory, Galveston, 
TX, USA.
(3)Zalgen Labs, Germantown, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
LA, USA.
(5)Zalgen Labs, Germantown, MD, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(6)La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA; Department of 
Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA; 
Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: erica@lji.org.

Lassa virus (LASV) causes hemorrhagic fever and is endemic in West Africa. 
Protective antibody responses primarily target the LASV surface glycoprotein 
(GPC), and GPC-B competition group antibodies often show potent neutralizing 
activity in humans. However, which features confer potent and broadly 
neutralizing antibody responses is unclear. Here, we compared three crystal 
structures of LASV GPC complexed with GPC-B antibodies of varying neutralization 
potency. Each GPC-B antibody recognized an overlapping epitope involved in 
binding of two adjacent GPC monomers and preserved the prefusion trimeric 
conformation. Differences among GPC-antibody interactions highlighted specific 
residues that enhance neutralization. Using structure-guided amino acid 
substitutions, we increased the neutralization potency and breadth of these 
antibodies to include all major LASV lineages. The ability to define antibody 
residues that allow potent and broad neutralizing activity, together with 
findings from analyses of inferred germline precursors, is critical to develop 
potent therapeutics and for vaccine design and assessment.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.020
PMCID: PMC6814208
PMID: 31398326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: The remaining authors 
declare no competing interests.