1. J Virol. 2019 Oct 29;93(22):e01277-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01277-19. Print 2019
Nov  15.

Biological Characterization of Conserved Residues within the Cytoplasmic Tail of 
the Pichinde Arenaviral Glycoprotein Subunit 2 (GP2).

Shao J(1), Huang Q(1), Liu X(1), Di D(1), Dileepan M(1), Brisse M(1), Ly 
H(#)(1), Liang Y(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities, Minnesota, USA liangy@umn.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Several mammarenaviruses can cause deadly hemorrhagic fever infections in 
humans, with limited preventative and therapeutic measures available. Arenavirus 
cell entry is mediated by the viral glycoprotein (GP) complex, which consists of 
the stable signal peptide (SSP), the receptor-binding subunit GP1, and the 
transmembrane subunit GP2. The GP2 cytoplasmic tail (CT) is relatively conserved 
among arenaviruses and is known to interact with the SSP to regulate GP 
processing and membrane fusion, but its biological role in the context of an 
infectious virus has not been fully characterized. Using a Pichinde virus (PICV) 
GP expression vector and a PICV reverse genetics system, we systematically 
characterized the functional roles of 12 conserved residues within the GP2 CT in 
GP processing, trafficking, assembly, and fusion, as well as in viral 
replication. Except for P478A and K505A R508A, alanine substitutions at 
conserved residues abolished GP processing and membrane fusion in 
plasmid-transfected cells. Six invariant H and C residues and W503 are essential 
for viral replication, as evidenced by the fact that their mutant viruses could 
not be rescued. Both P480A and R482A mutant viruses were rescued, grew similarly 
to wild-type (WT) virus, and produced evidently processed GP1 and GP2 subunits 
in virus-infected cells, despite the fact that the same mutations abolished GP 
processing and membrane fusion in a plasmid-based protein expression system, 
illustrating the importance of using an infectious-virus system for analyzing 
viral glycoprotein function. In summary, our results demonstrate an essential 
biological role of the GP2 CT in arenavirus replication and suggest it as a 
potential novel target for developing antivirals and/or attenuated viral vaccine 
candidates.IMPORTANCE Several arenaviruses, such as Lassa virus (LASV), can 
cause severe and lethal hemorrhagic fever diseases with high mortality and 
morbidity, for which no FDA-approved vaccines or therapeutics are available. 
Viral entry is mediated by the arenavirus GP complex, which consists of the 
stable signal peptide (SSP), the receptor-binding subunit GP1, and the 
transmembrane subunit GP2. The cytoplasmic tail (CT) of GP2 is highly conserved 
among arenaviruses, but its functional role in viral replication is not 
completely understood. Using a reverse genetics system of a prototypic 
arenavirus, Pichinde virus (PICV), we show that the GP2 CT contains certain 
conserved residues that are essential for virus replication, implicating it as a 
potentially good target for developing antivirals and live-attenuated viral 
vaccines against deadly arenavirus pathogens.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01277-19
PMCID: PMC6819926
PMID: 31462569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]