1. Front Immunol. 2019 Oct 22;10:2499. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02499. eCollection
 2019.

Junin Virus Triggers Macrophage Activation and Modulates Polarization According 
to Viral Strain Pathogenicity.

Ferrer MF(1), Thomas P(1), López Ortiz AO(1)(2), Errasti AE(3), Charo N(2), 
Romanowski V(1)(4), Gorgojo J(5), Rodriguez ME(5), Carrera Silva EA(2), Gómez 
RM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Virus Animales, Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología 
Molecular, CONICET-Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Trombosis Experimental, Instituto de Medicina Experimental, 
CONICET-Academia Nacional de Medicina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Facultad de Medicina, Instituto de Farmacologia, University of Buenos Aries, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Global Viral Network, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(5)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Fermentaciones Industriales, 
CONICET-Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

The New World arenavirus Junin (JUNV) is the etiological agent of Argentine 
hemorrhagic fever (AHF). Previous studies of human macrophage infection by the 
Old-World arenaviruses Mopeia and Lassa showed that while the non-pathogenic 
Mopeia virus replicates and activates human macrophages, the pathogenic Lassa 
virus replicates but fails to activate human macrophages. Less is known in 
regard to the impact of New World arenavirus infection on the human macrophage 
immune response. Macrophage activation is critical for controlling infections 
but could also be usurped favoring immune evasion. Therefore, it is crucial to 
understand how the JUNV infection modulates macrophage plasticity to clarify its 
role in AHF pathogenesis. With this aim in mind, we compared infection with the 
attenuated Candid 1 (C#1) or the pathogenic P strains of the JUNV virus in human 
macrophage cultures. The results showed that both JUNV strains similarly 
replicated and induced morphological changes as early as 1 day post-infection. 
However, both strains differentially induced the expression of CD71, the 
receptor for cell entry, the activation and maturation molecules CD80, CD86, and 
HLA-DR and selectively modulated cytokine production. Higher levels of TNF-α, 
IL-10, and IL-12 were detected with C#1 strain, while the P strain induced only 
higher levels of IL-6. We also found that C#1 strain infection skewed macrophage 
polarization to M1, whereas the P strain shifted the response to an M2 
phenotype. Interestingly, the MERTK receptor, that negatively regulates the 
immune response, was down-regulated by C#1 strain and up-regulated by P strain 
infection. Similarly, the target genes of MERTK activation, the cytokine 
suppressors SOCS1 and SOCS3, were also increased after P strain infection, in 
addition to IRF-1, that regulates type I IFN levels, which were higher with C#1 
compared with P strain infection. Together, this differential 
activation/polarization pattern of macrophages elicited by P strain suggests a 
more evasive immune response and may have important implications in the 
pathogenesis of AHF and underpinning the development of new potential 
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2019 Ferrer, Thomas, López Ortiz, Errasti, Charo, Romanowski, 
Gorgojo, Rodriguez, Carrera Silva and Gómez.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02499
PMCID: PMC6817498
PMID: 31695702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]