1. J Virol. 2020 Feb 14;94(5):e01741-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01741-19. Print 2020
Feb  14.

Monoclonal Antibodies with Neutralizing Activity and Fc-Effector Functions 
against the Machupo Virus Glycoprotein.

Amanat F(1)(2), Duehr J(1)(2), Huang C(3), Paessler S(3), Tan GS(4)(5), Krammer 
F(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Infectious Diseases, The J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, California, 
USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA florian.krammer@mssm.edu.

Machupo virus (MACV), the causative agent of Bolivian hemorrhagic fever (BHF), 
is a New World arenavirus that was first isolated in Bolivia from a human spleen 
in 1963. Due to the lack of a specific vaccine or therapy, this virus is 
considered a major risk to public health and is classified as a category A 
priority pathogen by the U.S. National Institutes of Health. In this study, we 
used DNA vaccination against the MACV glycoprotein precursor complex (GPC) and 
murine hybridoma technology to generate 25 mouse monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) 
against the GPC of MACV. Out of 25 MAbs, five were found to have potent 
neutralization activity in vitro against a recombinant vesicular stomatitis 
virus expressing MACV GPC (VSV-MACV) as well as against authentic MACV. 
Furthermore, the five neutralizing MAbs exhibited strong antibody-dependent 
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity in a reporter assay. When tested in vivo 
using VSV-MACV in a Stat2-/- mouse model, three MAbs significantly lowered viral 
loads in the spleen. Our work provides valuable insights into epitopes targeted 
by neutralizing antibodies that could be potent targets for vaccines and 
therapeutics and shed light on the importance of effector functions in immunity 
against MACV.IMPORTANCE MACV infections are a significant public health concern 
and lead to high case fatality rates. No specific treatment or vaccine for MACV 
infections exist. However, cases of Junin virus infection, a related virus, can 
be treated with convalescent-phase serum. This indicates that a MAb-based 
therapy for MACV could be effective. Here, we describe several MAbs that 
neutralize MACV and could be used for this purpose.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01741-19
PMCID: PMC7022345
PMID: 31801871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]