1. Vaccine. 2020 Mar 23;38(14):2949-2959. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.02.053.
Epub  2020 Feb 25.

Bivalent Junin & Machupo experimental vaccine based on alphavirus RNA replicon 
vector.

Johnson DM(1), Jokinen JD(2), Wang M(2), Pfeffer T(2), Tretyakova I(3), Carrion 
R Jr(4), Griffiths A(4), Pushko P(3), Lukashevich IS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Center for 
Predictive Medicine for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, NIH 
Regional Bio-containment Laboratory, University of Louisville, KY, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Center for 
Predictive Medicine for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, NIH 
Regional Bio-containment Laboratory, University of Louisville, KY, USA.
(3)Medigen, Inc., Frederick, MD, USA.
(4)Texas Biomedical Research Institute (TBRI), San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Center for 
Predictive Medicine for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, NIH 
Regional Bio-containment Laboratory, University of Louisville, KY, USA. 
Electronic address: igor.lukashevich@louisville.edu.

Junin (JUNV) and Machupo (MACV), two mammalian arenaviruses placed on the 2018 
WHO watch list, are prevalent in South America causing Argentine and Bolivian 
hemorrhagic fevers (AHF and BHF), respectively. The live attenuated JUNV 
vaccine, Candid #1, significantly reduced the incidence of AHF. Vaccination 
induces neutralizing antibody (nAb) responses which effectively target GP1 (the 
viral attachment glycoprotein) pocket which accepts the tyrosine residue of the 
cellular receptor, human transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1). In spite of close 
genetic relationships between JUNV and MACV, variability in the GP1 receptor 
binding site (e.g., MACV GP1 loop 10) results in poor MACV neutralization by 
Candid #1-induced nAbs. Candid #1 is not recommended for vaccination of children 
younger than 15 years old (a growing "at risk" group), pregnant women, or other 
immunocompromised individuals. Candid #1's primary reliance on limited missense 
mutations for attenuation, genetic heterogeneity, and potential stability 
concerns complicate approval of this vaccine in the US. To address these issues, 
we applied alphavirus RNA replicon vector technology based on the human 
Venezuelan equine encephalitis vaccine (VEEV) TC-83 to generate replication 
restricted virus-like-particles vectors (VLPVs) simultaneously expressing 
cellular glycoprotein precursors (GPC) of both viruses, JUNV and MACV. Resulting 
JV&MV VLPVs were found safe and immunogenic in guinea pigs. Immunization with 
VLPVs induced humoral responses which correlated with complete protection 
against lethal disease after challenge with pathogenic strains of JUNV (Romero) 
and MACV (Carvallo).

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.02.053
PMCID: PMC7112472
PMID: 32111526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.