1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Mar 1;17(3):e1009356. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009356. 
eCollection 2021 Mar.

Glycoprotein N-linked glycans play a critical role in arenavirus pathogenicity.

Koma T(1), Huang C(1), Coscia A(2), Hallam S(1), Manning JT(1), Maruyama J(1), 
Walker AG(1), Miller M(1), Smith JN(1), Patterson M(1), Abraham J(2), Paessler 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.

Several arenaviruses cause hemorrhagic fevers in humans with high case fatality 
rates. A vaccine named Candid#1 is available only against Junin virus (JUNV) in 
Argentina. Specific N-linked glycans on the arenavirus surface glycoprotein (GP) 
mask important epitopes and help the virus evade antibody responses. However the 
role of GPC glycans in arenavirus pathogenicity is largely unclear. In a lethal 
animal model of hemorrhagic fever-causing Machupo virus (MACV) infection, we 
found that a chimeric MACV with the ectodomain of GPC from Candid#1 vaccine was 
partially attenuated. Interestingly, mutations resulting in acquisition of 
N-linked glycans at GPC N83 and N166 frequently occurred in late stages of the 
infection. These glycosylation sites are conserved in the GPC of wild-type MACV, 
indicating that this is a phenotypic reversion for the chimeric MACV to gain 
those glycans crucial for infection in vivo. Further studies indicated that the 
GPC mutant viruses with additional glycans became more resistant to neutralizing 
antibodies and more virulent in animals. On the other hand, disruption of these 
glycosylation sites on wild-type MACV GPC rendered the virus substantially 
attenuated in vivo and also more susceptible to antibody neutralization, while 
loss of these glycans did not affect virus growth in cultured cells. We also 
found that MACV lacking specific GPC glycans elicited higher levels of 
neutralizing antibodies against wild-type MACV. Our findings revealed the 
critical role of specific glycans on GPC in arenavirus pathogenicity and have 
important implications for rational design of vaccines against this group of 
hemorrhagic fever-causing viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009356
PMCID: PMC7951981
PMID: 33647064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist. Author Milagros Miller was unable to confirm their authorship 
contributions. On their behalf, the corresponding author has reported their 
contributions to the best of their knowledge.