1. NPJ Vaccines. 2021 Mar 2;6(1):32. doi: 10.1038/s41541-021-00291-x.

ChAdOx1-vectored Lassa fever vaccine elicits a robust cellular and humoral 
immune response and protects guinea pigs against lethal Lassa virus challenge.

Fischer RJ(#)(1), Purushotham JN(#)(1)(2), van Doremalen N(1), Sebastian 
S(2)(3), Meade-White K(1), Cordova K(4), Letko M(1)(5), Jeremiah Matson M(1)(6), 
Feldmann F(4), Haddock E(1), LaCasse R(4), Saturday G(4), Lambe T(2), Gilbert 
SC(2), Munster VJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rocky 
Mountain Laboratories, Hamilton, MT, USA.
(2)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.
(3)Vaccitech Limited, Oxford, UK.
(4)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Hamilton, MT, USA.
(5)Paul G. Allen School of Global Animal Health, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA, USA.
(6)Marshall University Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Huntington, WV, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rocky 
Mountain Laboratories, Hamilton, MT, USA. vincent.munster@nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

Lassa virus (LASV) infects hundreds of thousands of individuals each year, 
highlighting the need for the accelerated development of preventive, diagnostic, 
and therapeutic interventions. To date, no vaccine has been licensed for LASV. 
ChAdOx1-Lassa-GPC is a chimpanzee adenovirus-vectored vaccine encoding the 
Josiah strain LASV glycoprotein precursor (GPC) gene. In the following study, we 
show that ChAdOx1-Lassa-GPC is immunogenic, inducing robust T-cell and antibody 
responses in mice. Furthermore, a single dose of ChAdOx1-Lassa-GPC fully 
protects Hartley guinea pigs against morbidity and mortality following lethal 
challenge with a guinea pig-adapted LASV (strain Josiah). By contrast, control 
vaccinated animals reached euthanasia criteria 10-12 days after infection. 
Limited amounts of LASV RNA were detected in the tissues of vaccinated animals. 
Viable LASV was detected in only one animal receiving a single dose of the 
vaccine. A prime-boost regimen of ChAdOx1-Lassa-GPC in guinea pigs significantly 
increased antigen-specific antibody titers and cleared viable LASV from the 
tissues. These data support further development of ChAdOx1-Lassa-GPC and testing 
in non-human primate models of infection.

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-021-00291-x
PMCID: PMC7925663
PMID: 33654106

Conflict of interest statement: S.C.G. is a board member of Vaccitech and named 
as an inventor on a patent covering use of ChAdOx1-vectored vaccines. S.S. is 
currently an employee of Vaccitech, but was employed a the University of Oxford 
at the time of her contribution to the work presented here. The remaining 
authors declare no competing interests.