1. J Virol. 2021 Jun 24;95(14):e0039721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00397-21. Epub 2021 Jun
 24.

Second-Generation Live-Attenuated Candid#1 Vaccine Virus Resists Reversion and 
Protects against Lethal Junín Virus Infection in Guinea Pigs.

Gowen BB(1), Hickerson BT(#)(1), York J(#)(2), Westover JB(#)(1), Sefing EJ(1), 
Bailey KW(1), Wandersee L(1), Nunberg JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal, Dairy and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University, 
Logan, Utah, USA.
(2)Montana Biotechnology Center, University of Montana, Missoula, Montana, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Live-attenuated virus vaccines are highly effective in preventing viral disease 
but carry intrinsic risks of residual virulence and reversion to pathogenicity. 
The classically derived Candid#1 virus protects seasonal field workers in 
Argentina against zoonotic infection by Junín virus (JUNV) but is not approved 
in the United States, in part due to the potential for reversion at the 
attenuating locus, a phenylalanine-to-isoleucine substitution at position 427 in 
the GP2 subunit of the GPC envelope glycoprotein. Previously, we demonstrated 
facile reversion of recombinant Candid#1 (rCan) in cell culture and identified 
an epistatic interaction between the attenuating I427 and a secondary K33S 
mutation in the stable signal peptide (SSP) subunit of GPC that imposes an 
evolutionary barrier to reversion. The magnitude of this genetic barrier is 
manifest in our repeated failures to rescue the hypothetical revertant virus. In 
this study, we show that K33S rCan is safe and attenuated in guinea pigs and 
capable of eliciting potent virus-neutralizing antibodies. Immunized animals are 
fully protected against lethal challenge with virulent JUNV. In addition, we 
employed a more permissive model of infection in neonatal mice to investigate 
genetic reversion. RNA sequence analysis of the recovered virus identified 
revertant viruses in pups inoculated with the parental rCan virus and none in 
mice receiving K33S rCan (P < 0.0001). Taken together, our findings support the 
further development of K33S rCan as a safe second-generation JUNV vaccine. 
IMPORTANCE Our most successful vaccines comprise weakened strains of virus that 
initiate a limited and benign infection in immunized persons. The 
live-attenuated Candid#1 strain of Junín virus (JUNV) was developed to protect 
field workers in Argentina from rodent-borne hemorrhagic fever but is not 
licensed in the United States, in part due to the likelihood of genetic 
reversion to virulence. A single-amino-acid change in the GPC envelope 
glycoprotein of the virus is responsible for attenuation, and a single 
nucleotide change may regenerate the pathogenic virus. Here, we take advantage 
of a unique genetic interaction between GPC subunits to design a mutant Candid#1 
virus that establishes an evolutionary barrier to reversion. The mutant virus 
(K33S rCan) is fully attenuated and protects immunized guinea pigs against 
lethal JUNV infection. We find no instances of reversion in mice inoculated with 
K33S rCan. This work supports the further development of K33S rCan as a 
second-generation JUNV vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00397-21
PMCID: PMC8223921
PMID: 33952638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]