1. J Virol. 2021 Aug 10;95(17):e0186820. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01868-20. Epub 2021 Aug
 10.

Antibody-Based Inhibition of Pathogenic New World Hemorrhagic Fever 
Mammarenaviruses by Steric Occlusion of the Human Transferrin Receptor 1 Apical 
Domain.

Ferrero S(#)(1), Flores MD(#)(2), Short C(2), Vazquez CA(3)(4), Clark LE(5), 
Ziegenbein J(2), Zink S(2), Fuentes D(2), Payes C(1), Batto MV(1), Collazo M(6), 
García CC(3)(4), Abraham J(5)(7), Cordo SM(3), Rodriguez JA(2), Helguera G(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Instituto de Biología y Medicina 
Experimental (IBYME-CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and 
Proteomics, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Laboratorio de Virología, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), IQUIBICEN, 
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)-UBA, Ciudad 
Universitaria, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)IQUIBICEN, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
(CONICET)-UBA, Ciudad Universitaria, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Biological Chemistry and Department of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, University of California Los Angeles, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and Proteomics, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2022 Feb 23;96(4):e0216321. doi: 10.1128/jvi.02163-21.

Pathogenic clade B New World mammarenaviruses (NWM) can cause Argentine, 
Venezuelan, Brazilian, and Bolivian hemorrhagic fevers. Sequence variability 
among NWM glycoproteins (GP) poses a challenge to the development of broadly 
neutralizing therapeutics against the entire clade of viruses. However, blockade 
of their shared binding site on the apical domain of human transferrin receptor 
1 (hTfR1/CD71) presents an opportunity for the development of effective and 
broadly neutralizing therapeutics. Here, we demonstrate that the murine 
monoclonal antibody OKT9, which targets the apical domain of hTfR1, can 
sterically block cellular entry by viral particles presenting clade B NWM 
glycoproteins (GP1-GP2). OKT9 blockade is also effective against viral particles 
pseudotyped with glycoproteins of a recently identified pathogenic Sabia-like 
virus. With nanomolar affinity for hTfR1, the OKT9 antigen binding fragment 
(OKT9-Fab) sterically blocks clade B NWM-GP1s and reduces infectivity of an 
attenuated strain of Junin virus. Binding of OKT9 to the hTfR1 ectodomain in its 
soluble, dimeric state produces stable assemblies that are observable by 
negative-stain electron microscopy. A model of the OKT9-sTfR1 complex, informed 
by the known crystallographic structure of sTfR1 and a newly determined 
structure of the OKT9 antigen binding fragment (Fab), suggests that OKT9 and the 
Machupo virus GP1 share a binding site on the hTfR1 apical domain. The 
structural basis for this interaction presents a framework for the design and 
development of high-affinity, broadly acting agents targeting clade B NWMs. 
IMPORTANCE Pathogenic clade B NWMs cause grave infectious diseases, the South 
American hemorrhagic fevers. Their etiological agents are Junin (JUNV), 
Guanarito (GTOV), Sabiá (SABV), Machupo (MACV), Chapare (CHAV), and a new 
Sabiá-like (SABV-L) virus recently identified in Brazil. These are priority A 
pathogens due to their high infectivity and mortality, their potential for 
person-to-person transmission, and the limited availability of effective 
therapeutics and vaccines to curb their effects. While low homology between 
surface glycoproteins of NWMs foils efforts to develop broadly neutralizing 
therapies targeting NWMs, this work provides structural evidence that OKT9, a 
monoclonal antibody targeting a single NWM glycoprotein binding site on hTfR1, 
can efficiently prevent their entry into cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01868-20
PMCID: PMC8354235
PMID: 34132574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]