1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Sep 7;17(9):e1009488. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009488. 
eCollection 2021 Sep.

The late endosome-resident lipid bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate is a cofactor for 
Lassa virus fusion.

Markosyan RM(1), Marin M(2)(3), Zhang Y(2)(3), Cohen FS(1), Melikyan GB(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Rush University Medical Center, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States 
of America.
(3)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

Arenavirus entry into host cells occurs through a low pH-dependent fusion with 
late endosomes that is mediated by the viral glycoprotein complex (GPC). The 
mechanisms of GPC-mediated membrane fusion and of virus targeting to late 
endosomes are not well understood. To gain insights into arenavirus fusion, we 
examined cell-cell fusion induced by the Old World Lassa virus (LASV) GPC 
complex. LASV GPC-mediated cell fusion is more efficient and occurs at higher pH 
with target cells expressing human LAMP1 compared to cells lacking this cognate 
receptor. However, human LAMP1 is not absolutely required for cell-cell fusion 
or LASV entry. We found that GPC-induced fusion progresses through the same 
lipid intermediates as fusion mediated by other viral glycoproteins-a lipid 
curvature-sensitive intermediate upstream of hemifusion and a hemifusion 
intermediate downstream of acid-dependent steps that can be arrested in the 
cold. Importantly, GPC-mediated fusion and LASV pseudovirus entry are 
specifically augmented by an anionic lipid, bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate (BMP), 
which is highly enriched in late endosomes. This lipid also specifically 
promotes cell fusion mediated by Junin virus GPC, an unrelated New World 
arenavirus. We show that BMP promotes late steps of LASV fusion downstream of 
hemifusion-the formation and enlargement of fusion pores. The BMP-dependence of 
post-hemifusion stages of arenavirus fusion suggests that these viruses evolved 
to use this lipid as a cofactor to selectively fuse with late endosomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009488
PMCID: PMC8448326
PMID: 34492091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.