1. Vaccines (Basel). 2022 Jan 22;10(2):173. doi: 10.3390/vaccines10020173.

Immunization with GP1 but Not Core-like Particles Displaying Isolated 
Receptor-Binding Epitopes Elicits Virus-Neutralizing Antibodies against Junín 
Virus.

Roman-Sosa G(1), Leske A(2), Ficht X(1), Dau TH(3), Holzerland J(2), Hoenen 
T(4), Beer M(5), Kammerer R(3), Schirmbeck R(1), Rey FA(6), Cordo SM(7), Groseth 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University Hospital, 89081 Ulm, 
Germany.
(2)Laboratory for Arenavirus Biology, Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell 
Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493 Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Laboratory for Immunogenetics, Institute of Immunology, 
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493 Greifswald, Germany.
(4)Laboratory for Integrative Cell and Infection Biology, Institute of Molecular 
Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493 Greifswald, 
Germany.
(5)National and OIE Reference Laboratory for BHV-1, Institute of Diagnostic 
Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493 Greifswald, Germany.
(6)Structural Virology Unit, CNRS UMR3569, Institut Pasteur, Université de 
Paris, 75015 Paris, France.
(7)Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales 
(IQUIBICEN), University of Buenos Aires, Ciudad Universitaria, Pabellón II, Piso 
4, Buenos Aires 1428, Argentina.

New World arenaviruses are rodent-transmitted viruses and include a number of 
pathogens that are responsible for causing severe human disease. This includes 
Junín virus (JUNV), which is the causative agent of Argentine hemorrhagic fever. 
The wild nature and mobility of the rodent reservoir host makes it difficult to 
control the disease, and currently passive immunization with high-titer 
neutralizing antibody-containing plasma from convalescent patients is the only 
specific therapy. However, dwindling supplies of naturally available 
convalescent plasma, and challenges in developing similar resources for other 
closely related viruses, have made the development of alternative antibody-based 
therapeutic approaches of critical importance. In this study, we sought to 
induce a neutralizing antibody response in rabbits against the receptor-binding 
subunit of the viral glycoprotein, GP1, and the specific peptide sequences in 
GP1 involved in cellular receptor contacts. While these specific 
receptor-interacting peptides did not efficiently induce the production of 
neutralizing antibodies when delivered as a particulate antigen (as part of 
hepatitis B virus core-like particles), we showed that recombinant JUNV GP1 
purified from transfected mammalian cells induced virus-neutralizing antibodies 
at high titers in rabbits. Further, neutralization was observed across a range 
of unrelated JUNV strains, a feature that is critical for effectiveness in the 
field. These results underscore the potential of GP1 alone to induce a potent 
neutralizing antibody response and highlight the importance of epitope 
presentation. In addition, effective virus neutralization by rabbit antibodies 
supports the potential applicability of this species for the future development 
of immunotherapeutics (e.g., based on humanized monoclonal antibodies). Such 
information can be applied in the design of vaccines and immunogens for both 
prevention and specific therapies against this and likely also other closely 
related pathogenic New World arenaviruses.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines10020173
PMCID: PMC8874384
PMID: 35214632

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
sponsors had no role in the design, execution, interpretation, or writing of the 
study.