1. mBio. 2022 Apr 26;13(2):e0265021. doi: 10.1128/mbio.02650-21. Epub 2022 Mar
22.

Contrasting Modes of New World Arenavirus Neutralization by 
Immunization-Elicited Monoclonal Antibodies.

Ng WM(#)(1), Sahin M(#)(2), Krumm SA(3), Seow J(3), Zeltina A(1), Harlos K(1), 
Paesen GC(1), Pinschewer DD(2), Doores KJ(3), Bowden TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxfordgrid.4991.5, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Division of Experimental Virology, University of 
Baselgrid.6612.3, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Kings College London, Department of Infectious Diseases, Guy's Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Transmission of the New World hemorrhagic fever arenaviruses Junín virus (JUNV) 
and Machupo virus (MACV) to humans is facilitated, in part, by the interaction 
between the arenavirus GP1 glycoprotein and the human transferrin receptor 1 
(hTfR1). We utilize a mouse model of live-attenuated immunization with envelope 
exchange viruses to isolate neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (NAbs) specific 
to JUNV GP1 and MACV GP1. Structures of two NAbs, termed JUN1 and MAC1, 
demonstrate that they neutralize through disruption of hTfR1 recognition. JUN1 
utilizes a binding mode common to all characterized infection- and 
vaccine-elicited JUNV-specific NAbs, which involves mimicking hTfR1 binding 
through the insertion of a tyrosine into the receptor-binding site. In contrast, 
MAC1 undergoes a tyrosine-mediated mode of antigen recognition distinct from 
that used by the reported anti-JUNV NAbs and the only other characterized 
anti-MACV NAb. These data reveal the varied modes of GP1-specific recognition 
among New World arenaviruses by the antibody-mediated immune response. 
IMPORTANCE The GP1 subcomponent of the New World arenavirus GP is a primary 
target of the neutralizing antibody response, which has been shown to be 
effective in the prevention and treatment of infection. Here, we characterize 
the structural basis of the antibody-mediated immune response that arises from 
immunization of mice against Junín virus and Machupo virus, two rodent-borne 
zoonotic New World arenaviruses. We isolate a panel of GP1-specific monoclonal 
antibodies that recognize overlapping epitopes and exhibit neutralizing 
behavior, in vitro. Structural characterization of two of these antibodies 
indicates that antibody recognition likely interferes with GP1-mediated 
recognition of the transferrin receptor 1. These data provide molecular-level 
detail for a key region of vulnerability on the New World arenavirus surface and 
a blueprint for therapeutic antibody development.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.02650-21
PMCID: PMC9040744
PMID: 35315691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
D.D.P. is a founder, consultant, and shareholder of Hookipa Pharma Inc. 
commercializing arenavirus-based vector technology, and he is listed as inventor 
on corresponding patents.