1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2022 Nov 1;1864(11):184031. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2022.184031. Epub 2022 Aug 12.

Interaction of Lassa virus fusion and membrane proximal peptides with late 
endosomal membranes.

Villalaín J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Research, Development, and Innovation in Healthcare 
Biotechnology (IDiBE), Universitas "Miguel Hernández", E-03202 Elche-Alicante, 
Spain. Electronic address: jvillalain@umh.es.

Mammarenaviruses include many significant worldwide-widespread human pathogens, 
among them Lassa virus (LASV), having a dramatic morbidity and mortality rate. 
They are a potential high-risk menace to the worldwide public health since there 
are no treatments and there is a high possibility of animal-to-human and 
human-to-human viral transmission. These viruses enter into the cells by 
endocytosis fusing its membrane envelope with the late endosomal membrane thanks 
to the glycoprotein GP2, a membrane fusion protein of class I. This protein 
contains different domains, among them the N-terminal fusion peptide (NFP), the 
internal fusion loop (IFL), the membrane proximal external region (MPER) and the 
transmembrane domain (TMD). All these domains are implicated in the membrane 
fusion process. In this work, we have used an all-atom molecular dynamics study 
to know the binding of these protein domains with a complex membrane mimicking 
the late endosome one. We show that the NFP/IFL domain is capable of 
spontaneously inserting into the membrane without a significant change of 
secondary structure, the MPER domain locates at the bilayer interface with an 
orientation parallel to the membrane surface and tends to interact with other 
MPER domains, and the TMD domain tilts inside the bilayer. Moreover, they 
predominantly interact with negatively charged phospholipids. Overall, these 
membrane-interacting domains would characterise a target that would make 
possible to find effective antiviral molecules against LASV in particular and 
Mammarenaviruses in general.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2022.184031
PMID: 35964711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None to 
declare.