1. PLoS Pathog. 2022 Aug 15;18(8):e1010625. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010625. 
eCollection 2022 Aug.

Human LAMP1 accelerates Lassa virus fusion and potently promotes fusion pore 
dilation upon forcing viral fusion with non-endosomal membrane.

Zhang Y(1), Carlos de la Torre J(2), Melikyan GB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, United States of America.
(3)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

Lassa virus (LASV) cell entry is mediated by the interaction of the virus 
glycoprotein complex (GPC) with alpha-dystroglycan at the cell surface followed 
by binding to LAMP1 in late endosomes. However, LAMP1 is not absolutely required 
for LASV fusion, as this virus can infect LAMP1-deficient cells. Here, we used 
LASV GPC pseudoviruses, LASV virus-like particles and recombinant lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus expressing LASV GPC to investigate the role of human 
LAMP1 (hLAMP1) in LASV fusion with human and avian cells expressing a LAMP1 
ortholog that does not support LASV entry. We employed a combination of single 
virus imaging and virus population-based fusion and infectivity assays to 
dissect the hLAMP1 requirement for initiation and completion of LASV fusion that 
culminates in the release of viral ribonucleoprotein into the cytoplasm. 
Unexpectedly, ectopic expression of hLAMP1 accelerated the kinetics of small 
fusion pore formation, but only modestly increased productive LASV fusion and 
infection of human and avian cells. To assess the effects of hLAMP1 in the 
absence of requisite endosomal host factors, we forced LASV fusion with the 
plasma membrane by applying low pH. Unlike the conventional LASV entry pathway, 
ectopic hLAMP1 expression dramatically promoted the initial and full dilation of 
pores formed through forced fusion at the plasma membrane. We further show that, 
while the soluble hLAMP1 ectodomain accelerates the kinetics of nascent pore 
formation, it fails to promote efficient pore dilation, suggesting the hLAMP1 
transmembrane domain is involved in this late stage of LASV fusion. These 
findings reveal a previously unappreciated role of hLAMP1 in promoting dilation 
of LASV fusion pores, which is difficult to ascertain for endosomal fusion where 
several co-factors, such as bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate, likely regulate LASV 
entry.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010625
PMCID: PMC9410554
PMID: 35969633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.