1. Front Immunol. 2022 Aug 18;13:963023. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.963023. 
eCollection 2022.

A platform technology for generating subunit vaccines against diverse viral 
pathogens.

Young A(1)(2), Isaacs A(1), Scott CAP(1), Modhiran N(1)(2), McMillan CLD(1), 
Cheung STM(1), Barr J(3), Marsh G(3), Thakur N(4)(5), Bailey D(4), Li KSM(6), 
Luk HKH(6), Kok KH(6), Lau SKP(6), Woo PCY(6), Furuyama W(7), Marzi A(7), Young 
PR(1)(2)(8), Chappell KJ(1)(2)(8), Watterson D(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)The Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)CSIRO, Health and Biosecurity, Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, 
Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(4)The Pirbright Institute, Woking, United Kingdom.
(5)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, Medical Sciences Division, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(7)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, 
United States.
(8)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

The COVID-19 pandemic response has shown how vaccine platform technologies can 
be used to rapidly and effectively counteract a novel emerging infectious 
disease. The speed of development for mRNA and vector-based vaccines outpaced 
those of subunit vaccines, however, subunit vaccines can offer advantages in 
terms of safety and stability. Here we describe a subunit vaccine platform 
technology, the molecular clamp, in application to four viruses from divergent 
taxonomic families: Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), 
Ebola virus (EBOV), Lassa virus (LASV) and Nipah virus (NiV). The clamp 
streamlines subunit antigen production by both stabilising the immunologically 
important prefusion epitopes of trimeric viral fusion proteins while enabling 
purification without target-specific reagents by acting as an affinity tag. 
Conformations for each viral antigen were confirmed by monoclonal antibody 
binding, size exclusion chromatography and electron microscopy. Notably, all 
four antigens tested remained stable over four weeks of incubation at 40°C. Of 
the four vaccines tested, a neutralising immune response was stimulated by clamp 
stabilised MERS-CoV spike, EBOV glycoprotein and NiV fusion protein. Only the 
clamp stabilised LASV glycoprotein precursor failed to elicit virus neutralising 
antibodies. MERS-CoV and EBOV vaccine candidates were both tested in animal 
models and found to provide protection against viral challenge.

Copyright © 2022 Young, Isaacs, Scott, Modhiran, McMillan, Cheung, Barr, Marsh, 
Thakur, Bailey, Li, Luk, Kok, Lau, Woo, Furuyama, Marzi, Young, Chappell and 
Watterson.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.963023
PMCID: PMC9436389
PMID: 36059532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.