1. Vet Sci. 2022 Oct 10;9(10):555. doi: 10.3390/vetsci9100555.

Construction of Recombinant Rabies Virus Vectors Expressing H or F Protein of 
Peste des Petits Ruminants Virus.

Wang H(1)(2), Bi J(3), Feng N(1), Zhao Y(1), Wang T(1), Li Y(2), Yan F(1), Yang 
S(1), Xia X(1).

Author information:
(1)Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agriculture 
Sciences, Changchun 130000, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Henan Institute of Science 
and Technology, Xinxiang 130118, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin Agriculture University, Changchun 
453003, China.

Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is one of the most contagious and fatal 
diseases of small ruminants in the world and is classified as a category A 
epidemic disease. It is the target of a global eradication campaign led by the 
Office International des Epizooties (OIE) and Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations (FAO). The PPR live attenuated vaccine is currently the 
most widely used and approved vaccine, but the use of this vaccine interferes 
with the serological testing of the PPR elimination program, and there is a 
potential safety risk. Viral vector vaccines are one of the most promising 
methods to solve this dilemma. In this study, the full-length infectious clone 
plasmid of rabies virus (RABV), pD-SRV9-PM-LASV, was used as the backbone, and 
the envelope glycoprotein H (hemagglutinin protein) or F (fusion protein) gene 
of PPRV was inserted into the backbone plasmid to construct the infectious 
clones pD-SRV9-PM-PPRV-H and pD-SRV9-PM-PPRV-F, which express the PPRV H and 
PPRV F genes, respectively. The correct construction of these infectious clones 
was verified after sequencing and double digestion. The infectious clones were 
transfected with a helper plasmid into BSR/T7 cells, and recombinant viruses 
were successfully rescued by direct immunofluorescence, indirect 
immunofluorescence, Western blotting, and transmission electron microscopy and 
named rSRV9-H and rSRV9-F. The results of growth kinetics studies indicated that 
the inserted gene did not affect virus proliferation. Stability studies revealed 
that the inserted target gene was stably expressed in recombinant RABV for at 
least 15 generations. In this study, the recombinant viruses rSRV9-H and rSRV9-F 
were successfully rescued. The constructed viruses had good proliferative 
activity and stability and provided potential bivalent inactivated vaccine 
candidate strains for the prevention of PPR and livestock rabies.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci9100555
PMCID: PMC9610701
PMID: 36288168

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.