1. mSphere. 2023 Feb 21;8(1):e0056822. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00568-22. Epub 2023
Jan  31.

VelcroVax: a "Bolt-On" Vaccine Platform for Glycoprotein Display.

Kingston NJ(#)(1), Grehan K(#)(1), Snowden JS(#)(1), Hassall M(2), Alzahrani 
J(1), Paesen GC(3), Sherry L(1), Hayward C(1), Roe A(1), Stephen S(1), Tomlinson 
D(1), Zeltina A(3), Doores KJ(4), Ranson NA(1), Stacey M(1), Page M(2), Rose 
NJ(2), Bowden TA(3), Rowlands DJ(1), Stonehouse NJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control 
(NIBSC), Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Structural Biology, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial 
Sciences, King's College London, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Having varied approaches to the design and manufacture of vaccines is critical 
in being able to respond to worldwide needs and newly emerging pathogens. 
Virus-like particles (VLPs) form the basis of two of the most successful 
licensed vaccines (against hepatitis B virus [HBV] and human papillomavirus). 
They are produced by recombinant expression of viral structural proteins, which 
assemble into immunogenic nanoparticles. VLPs can be modified to present 
unrelated antigens, and here we describe a universal "bolt-on" platform (termed 
VelcroVax) where the capturing VLP and the target antigen are produced 
separately. We utilize a modified HBV core (HBcAg) VLP with surface expression 
of a high-affinity binding sequence (Affimer) directed against a SUMO tag and 
use this to capture SUMO-tagged gp1 glycoprotein from the arenavirus Junín virus 
(JUNV). Using this model system, we have solved the first high-resolution 
structures of VelcroVax VLPs and shown that the VelcroVax-JUNV gp1 complex 
induces superior humoral immune responses compared to the noncomplexed viral 
protein. We propose that this system could be modified to present a range of 
antigens and therefore form the foundation of future rapid-response vaccination 
strategies. IMPORTANCE The hepatitis B core protein (HBc) forms noninfectious 
virus-like particles, which can be modified to present a capturing molecule, 
allowing suitably tagged antigens to be bound on their surface. This system can 
be adapted and provides the foundation for a universal "bolt-on" vaccine 
platform (termed VelcroVax) that can be easily and rapidly modified to generate 
nanoparticle vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00568-22
PMCID: PMC9942589
PMID: 36719225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.