1. J Infect Dis. 2023 Oct 18;228(Suppl 6):S359-S375. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiac266.

The Arenaviridae Family: Knowledge Gaps, Animal Models, Countermeasures, and 
Prototype Pathogens.

Hastie KM(1), Melnik LI(2), Cross RW(3), Klitting RM(4)(5), Andersen KG(4)(5), 
Saphire EO(1)(6), Garry RF(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, La Jolla Institute for 
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston National Laboratory, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, USA.
(5)Scripps Research Translational Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(7)Zalgen Labs LLC, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

Lassa virus (LASV), Junin virus (JUNV), and several other members of the 
Arenaviridae family are capable of zoonotic transfer to humans and induction of 
severe viral hemorrhagic fevers. Despite the importance of arenaviruses as 
potential pandemic pathogens, numerous gaps exist in scientific knowledge 
pertaining to this diverse family, including gaps in understanding replication, 
immunosuppression, receptor usage, and elicitation of neutralizing antibody 
responses, that in turn complicates development of medical countermeasures. A 
further challenge to the development of medical countermeasures for arenaviruses 
is the requirement for use of animal models at high levels of biocontainment, 
where each model has distinct advantages and limitations depending on, 
availability of space, animals species-specific reagents, and most importantly 
the ability of the model to faithfully recapitulate human disease. Designation 
of LASV and JUNV as prototype pathogens can facilitate progress in addressing 
the public health challenges posed by members of this important virus family.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiac266
PMCID: PMC10582522
PMID: 37849403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. R. F. G. is a 
cofounder of Zalgen Labs, a biotechnology company developing countermeasures for 
emerging viruses, including arenaviruses. All other authors report no potential 
conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the 
content of the manuscript have been disclosed.