1. Biotechnol Adv. 2024 Jan-Feb;70:108283. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108283.
 Epub 2023 Nov 14.

Influence of glycosylation on the immunogenicity and antigenicity of viral 
immunogens.

Newby ML(1), Allen JD(2), Crispin M(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 
1BJ, UK.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 
1BJ, UK. Electronic address: joel.allen@soton.ac.uk.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 
1BJ, UK. Electronic address: max.crispin@soton.ac.uk.

A key aspect of successful viral vaccine design is the elicitation of 
neutralizing antibodies targeting viral attachment and fusion glycoproteins that 
embellish viral particles. This observation has catalyzed the development of 
numerous viral glycoprotein mimetics as vaccines. Glycans can dominate the 
surface of viral glycoproteins and as such, the viral glycome can influence the 
antigenicity and immunogenicity of a candidate vaccine. In one extreme, glycans 
can form an integral part of epitopes targeted by neutralizing antibodies and 
are therefore considered to be an important feature of key immunogens within an 
immunization regimen. In the other extreme, the existence of peptide and 
bacterially expressed protein vaccines shows that viral glycosylation can be 
dispensable in some cases. However, native-like glycosylation can indicate 
native-like protein folding and the presence of conformational epitopes. 
Furthermore, going beyond native glycan mimicry, in either occupancy of 
glycosylation sites or the glycan processing state, may offer opportunities for 
enhancing the immunogenicity and associated protection elicited by an immunogen. 
Here, we review key determinants of viral glycosylation and how recombinant 
immunogens can recapitulate these signatures across a range of enveloped 
viruses, including HIV-1, Ebola virus, SARS-CoV-2, Influenza and Lassa virus. 
The emerging understanding of immunogen glycosylation and its control will help 
guide the development of future vaccines in both recombinant protein- and 
nucleic acid-based vaccine technologies.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108283
PMCID: PMC10867814
PMID: 37972669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
for the manuscript titled Influence of glycosylation on the immunogenicity and 
antigenicity of viral immunogens declare no conflicting interests as outlined by 
Biotechnology Advances.