1. J Virol. 2024 Jul 23;98(7):e0071424. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00714-24. Epub 2024 May 
29.

Hexestrol, an estrogen receptor agonist, inhibits Lassa virus entry.

Zhang Z(1)(2)(3), Takenaga T(1)(2)(3), Fehling SK(4), Igarashi M(5)(6), Hirokawa 
T(7)(8), Muramoto Y(1)(2)(3), Yamauchi K(1)(2)(3), Onishi C(1)(2)(3), Nakano 
M(1)(2)(3), Urata S(9), Groseth A(10), Strecker T(4), Noda T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Ultrastructural Virology, Institute for Life and Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Ultrastructural Virology, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan.
(4)Institute of Virology, Phillips University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(5)Division of Global Epidemiology, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(6)International Collaboration Unit, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(7)Transborder Medical Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.
(8)Division of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(9)National Research Center for the Control and Prevention of Infectious 
Diseases (CCPID), Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(10)Laboratory for Arenavirus Biology, Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell 
Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Lassa virus (LASV) is the causative agent of human Lassa fever which in severe 
cases manifests as hemorrhagic fever leading to thousands of deaths annually. 
However, no approved vaccines or antiviral drugs are currently available. 
Recently, we screened approximately 2,500 compounds using a recombinant 
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) expressing LASV glycoprotein GP (VSV-LASVGP) 
and identified a P-glycoprotein inhibitor as a potential LASV entry inhibitor. 
Here, we show that another identified candidate, hexestrol (HES), an estrogen 
receptor agonist, is also a LASV entry inhibitor. HES inhibited VSV-LASVGP 
replication with a 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 0.63 µM. Importantly, 
HES also inhibited authentic LASV replication with IC50 values of 0.31 µM-0.61 
µM. Time-of-addition and cell-based membrane fusion assays suggested that HES 
inhibits the membrane fusion step during virus entry. Alternative estrogen 
receptor agonists did not inhibit VSV-LASVGP replication, suggesting that the 
estrogen receptor itself is unlikely to be involved in the antiviral activity of 
HES. Generation of a HES-resistant mutant revealed that the phenylalanine at 
amino acid position 446 (F446) of LASVGP, which is located in the transmembrane 
region, conferred resistance to HES. Although mutation of F446 enhanced the 
membrane fusion activity of LASVGP, it exhibited reduced VSV-LASVGP replication, 
most likely due to the instability of the pre-fusion state of LASVGP. 
Collectively, our results demonstrated that HES is a promising anti-LASV drug 
that acts by inhibiting the membrane fusion step of LASV entry. This study also 
highlights the importance of the LASVGP transmembrane region as a target for 
anti-LASV drugs.IMPORTANCELassa virus (LASV), the causative agent of Lassa 
fever, is the most devastating mammarenavirus with respect to its impact on 
public health in West Africa. However, no approved antiviral drugs or vaccines 
are currently available. Here, we identified hexestrol (HES), an estrogen 
receptor agonist, as the potential antiviral candidate drug. We showed that the 
estrogen receptor itself is not involved in the antiviral activity. HES directly 
bound to LASVGP and blocked membrane fusion, thereby inhibiting LASV infection. 
Through the generation of a HES-resistant virus, we found that phenylalanine at 
position 446 (F446) within the LASVGP transmembrane region plays a crucial role 
in the antiviral activity of HES. The mutation at F446 caused reduced virus 
replication, likely due to the instability of the pre-fusion state of LASVGP. 
These findings highlight the potential of HES as a promising candidate for the 
development of antiviral compounds targeting LASV.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00714-24
PMCID: PMC11265444
PMID: 38809021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.