1. Vaccine. 2025 Jun 11;58:127137. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2025.127137. Epub 2025 
May 13.

A Brighton Collaboration standardized template with key considerations for a 
benefit/risk assessment for the emergent vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) viral 
vector vaccine for Lassa fever.

Spurgers K(1), Wynn M(1), Charles L(1), Hamm S(2), Matassov D(2), Gerardi C(2), 
Smith ER(3), Gurwith M(4), Chen RT(4); Benefit-Risk Assessment of Vaccines by 
Technology Working Group (BRAVATO; ex-V3SWG).

Author information:
(1)Emergent Product Development Gaithersburg Inc, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(2)Auro Vaccines LLC, Pearl River, NY, USA.
(3)Brighton Collaboration, a program of the Task Force for Global Health, 
Decatur, GA, USA. Electronic address: bc-coordinator@taskforce.org.
(4)Brighton Collaboration, a program of the Task Force for Global Health, 
Decatur, GA, USA.

There are currently no prophylactic vaccines licensed to protect against Lassa 
fever caused by Lassa virus (LASV) infection. The Emergent BioSolutions (EBS) 
vaccine candidate, EBS-LASV, is being developed for the prevention of Lassa 
fever. EBS-LASV is a live-attenuated recombinant Vesicular Stomatitis Virus 
(rVSV)-vectored vaccine encoding the surface glycoprotein complex (GPC) from 
LASV and has two attenuating vector modifications: a gene shuffle of the VSV N 
gene and a deletion of the VSV G gene. Several preclinical safety studies 
demonstrate that EBS-LASV is safe when administered to animals. Likewise, in 
non-human primate immunogenicity and efficacy studies, administration of 
EBS-LASV produces a cellular and humoral immune response that fully protects 
NHPs from a lethal Lassa virus challenge. Together, these studies supported a 
first-in-human dose-escalation, safety, and immunogenicity clinical study. This 
paper uses a viral vector vaccine safety template developed by the Benefit-Risk 
Assessment of VAccines by TechnolOgy (BRAVATO) Working Group to review the 
features of the rVSV-vectored EBS-LASV vaccine candidate and provides a 
high-level summary of safety findings from preclinical studies and the Phase 1 
clinical study.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2025.127137
PMID: 40367816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: The rVSV-N4△G vector described in 
this manuscript is the subject of patents licensed to Auro Vaccines LLC and 
Emergent BioSolution; E. R. S., M. C., and R. T. C. declared no conflict of 
interest.