1. Viruses. 2025 Apr 22;17(5):592. doi: 10.3390/v17050592.

Lassa Virus Infection of Primary Human Airway Epithelial Cells.

Müller-Kräuter H(1), Fehling SK(1), Sauerhering L(1), Ehlert B(1), Koepke J(2), 
Schilling J(1), Matrosovich M(1), Maisner A(1), Strecker T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Philipps University Marburg, Hans-Meerwein-Str. 2, 
35043 Marburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Molecular Pneumology, Cardio-Pulmonary 
Institute, Justus-Liebig University of Giessen, Aulweg 130, 35392 Gießen, 
Germany.

Lassa mammarenavirus (LASV), a member of the family Arenaviridae, is a highly 
pathogenic virus capable of causing severe systemic infections in humans. The 
primary host reservoir is the Natal multimammate mouse (Mastomys natalensis), 
with human infections typically occurring through mucosal exposure to 
virus-containing aerosols from rodent excretions. To better understand the 
molecular mechanisms underlying LASV replication in the respiratory tract, we 
utilized differentiated primary human airway epithelial cells (HAECs) grown 
under air-liquid interface conditions, closely mimicking the bronchial 
epithelium in vivo. Our findings demonstrate that HAECs are permissive to LASV 
infection and support productive virus replication. While LASV entry into 
polarized HAECs occurred through both apical and basolateral surfaces, progeny 
virus particles were predominantly released from the apical surface, consistent 
with an intrinsic apical localization of the envelope glycoprotein GP. This 
suggests that apical virus shedding from infected bronchial epithelia may 
facilitate LASV transmission via airway secretions. Notably, limited basolateral 
release at later stages of infection was associated with LASV-induced 
rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton, resulting in compromised epithelial 
barrier integrity. Finally, we demonstrate that LASV-infected HAECs exhibited a 
pronounced type III interferon response. A detailed understanding of LASV 
replication and host epithelial responses in the respiratory tract could 
facilitate the development of targeted future therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3390/v17050592
PMCID: PMC12116150
PMID: 40431605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of this study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the 
decision to publish the results.