1. mBio. 2025 Jul 9;16(7):e0107625. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01076-25. Epub 2025 Jun 13.

Structure and stabilization of the antigenic glycoprotein building blocks of the 
New World mammarenavirus spike complex.

Paesen GC(1), Ng WM(1)(2)(3), Kimuda S(4), Sutton G(1), Doores KJ(4), Bowden 
TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Centre for Human Genetics, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Research Complex at Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Harwell, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Electron Bio-Imaging Centre, Diamond Light Source, Didcot, United Kingdom.
(4)Kings College London, Department of Infectious Diseases, Guy's Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.

The spillover of New World (NW) arenaviruses from rodent reservoirs into human 
populations poses a continued risk to human health. NW arenaviruses present a 
glycoprotein (GP) complex on the envelope surface of the virion, which 
orchestrates host cell entry and is a key target of the immune response arising 
from infection and immunization. Each protomer of the trimeric GP is composed of 
a stable signal peptide, a GP1 attachment glycoprotein, and a GP2 fusion 
glycoprotein. To glean insights into the architecture of this key therapeutic 
target, we determined the crystal structures of NW GP1-GP2 heterodimeric 
complexes from Junín virus and Machupo virus. Due to the metastability of the 
interaction between GP1 and GP2, structural elucidation required the 
introduction of a disulfide bond at the GP1-GP2 complex interface, but no other 
stabilizing modifications were required. While the overall assembly of NW 
GP1-GP2 is conserved with that presented by Old World (OW) arenaviruses, 
including Lassa virus and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, NW GP1-GP2 
complexes are structurally distinct. Indeed, we note that when compared to the 
OW GP1-GP2 complex, the globular portion of NW GP1 undergoes limited structural 
alterations upon detachment from its cognate GP2. We further demonstrate that 
our engineered GP1-GP2 heterodimers are antigenically relevant and recognized by 
neutralizing antibodies. These data provide insights into the distinct 
assemblies presented by NW and OW arenaviruses, as well as provide 
molecular-level blueprints that may guide vaccine development.IMPORTANCEAlthough 
the emergence of New World (NW) hemorrhagic fever mammarenaviruses poses an 
unceasing threat to human health, there is a paucity of reagents capable of 
protecting against the transmission of these pathogens from their natural rodent 
reservoirs. This is, in part, attributed to our limited understanding of the 
structure and function of the NW glycoprotein spike complex presented on the NW 
arenavirus surface. Here, we provide a detailed molecular-level description of 
how the two major components of this key therapeutic target assemble to form a 
key building block of the NW arenaviral spike complex. The insights gleaned from 
this work provide a framework for guiding the structure-based development of NW 
arenaviral vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01076-25
PMCID: PMC12239557
PMID: 40511941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.