1. Nat Commun. 2026 Apr 6. doi: 10.1038/s41467-026-71472-2. Online ahead of
print.

B cell immunity to the Lassa virus glycoprotein is a correlate of 
vaccination-induced virus control in mice.

Abreu-Mota T(#)(1), Marx AF(#)(2), Winterberg D(3), Tintignac K(2), Fixemer 
J(2), Geier F(2)(4), Brodmann N(2), Seven C(2), Reichmuth C(2), Kastner AL(2), 
Lu M(2), Bonilla WV(2), Dimitrova M(2), Sahin M(2), Zimmer G(5)(6), Peipp M(3), 
Pinschewer DD(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine - Haus Petersplatz, Division of Experimental 
Virology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 
tiagojose.abreumota@unibas.ch.
(2)Department of Biomedicine - Haus Petersplatz, Division of Experimental 
Virology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Antibody-Based Immunotherapy, Department of Medicine II, 
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Department Biomedicine, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Virology and Immunology IVI, Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Biomedicine - Haus Petersplatz, Division of Experimental 
Virology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. Daniel.pinschewer@unibas.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Lassa fever, a viral hemorrhagic fever caused by the arenavirus Lassa virus 
(LASV), affects thousands of individuals annually, highlighting the need for a 
vaccine. Yet, immunological correlates of viral load control remain poorly 
defined. Here we study vaccination-induced immunity in a surrogate LASV 
challenge model in mice. We find that LASV-cross-reactive B cell immunity 
induced by the glycoprotein of distantly related arenaviruses, such as 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), provides significant viral load 
control. Counter to common concepts, suppression of viremia is observed in the 
absence of CD8 T cells or neutralizing antibodies but correlates with 
non-neutralizing glycoprotein-specific antibody responses. Adoptive cell 
transfer experiments with monoclonal LCMV-specific B cells demonstrates that 
these cells suppress viral loads when previously activated by a heterologous 
cross-reactive glycoprotein and diversified by somatic hypermutation. These 
findings establish vaccination-induced B cell immunity to the LASV glycoprotein 
as a correlate of viral load control, independently of virus-neutralizing 
antibody titers at the time of challenge.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-026-71472-2
PMID: 41942476

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: D.D.P. is a founder, 
consultant and shareholder of Hookipa Pharma Inc. commercializing 
arenavirus-based vector technology, and he as well as W.V.B. are listed as 
inventor on corresponding patents. The remaining authors declare no competing 
interests.