1. J Virol. 2026 Apr 27:e0037226. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00372-26. Online ahead of
print.

Griffithsin-mediated inhibition of cellular entry of hemorrhagic fever viruses 
and insights into its mechanisms.

Saito T(#)(1), Furuyama W(#)(2), Muthusinghe DS(#)(2), Munyeku-Bazitama 
Y(3)(4)(5)(6), Hattori T(3), Okabe M(7), Yokoyama T(7), Tanaka Y(7), Sakai R(8), 
Sakurai Y(2)(9), Sakaguchi M(9), Tsukagoshi R(1), Coronado Barrios NS(1), Tipih 
T(10), Rosenke K(10), Marzi A(10), Igarashi M(3)(11), Urata S(2)(9), Maruyama 
J(1), Nanbo A(2)(9), Takada A(3)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(2)National Research Center for the Control and Prevention of Infectious 
Diseases, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(3)Division of Global Epidemiology, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.
(5)Département de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université de 
Kinshasa, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Kikwit, Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the 
Congo.
(7)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(8)Hokkaido University Faculty and Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, 
Hakodate, Japan.
(9)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(10)Laboratory of Virology, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Division of Intramural 
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, USA.
(11)International Collaboration Unit, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(12)One Health Research Center, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(13)Department of Disease Control, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia.
(#)Contributed equally

Griffithsin (GRFT), a lectin derived from the red algae Griffithsia, is known as 
an antiviral agent that binds to high-mannose glycans on viral envelope 
glycoproteins (GPs). In this study, we evaluated the antiviral activity of GRFT 
against Ebola virus (EBOV), Marburg virus (MARV), Lassa virus (LASV), Lujo virus 
(LUJV), and Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), all of which cause 
severe and often fatal hemorrhagic fevers in humans. GRFT effectively blocked 
the entry of these viruses into cells, with stronger inhibition observed against 
LASV, LUJV, and CCHFV than against EBOV and MARV. This inhibitory effect 
depended on the lectin activity of GRFT, as its mutant lacking glycan-binding 
function completely lost the ability to inhibit the entry of these viruses into 
cells. We found that GRFT induced aggregation of virus-like particles (VLPs) 
derived from EBOV and MARV, whereas this activity was not observed with LASV- 
and LUJV-derived VLPs. Most of the escape mutants of LASV and LUJV GPs exhibited 
amino acid substitutions that likely disrupted GRFT binding by removing 
glycosylation sites at positions 79 and 73, respectively. Interestingly, other 
substitutions close to these positions, although unrelated to glycosylation, 
also contributed to reduced inhibitory activity of GRFT, suggesting a unique 
recognition mode in which both sugar chains and adjacent amino acid residues 
constitute the binding site structure for GRFT. Overall, our results provide 
insights into mechanisms underlying the antiviral effects of GRFT and highlight 
lectin-related activities as a key feature for broad-spectrum antiviral agents 
targeting highly glycosylated envelope GPs.
IMPORTANCE: Emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases, including viral 
hemorrhagic fevers, pose a major global health threat due to their potential for 
widespread outbreaks. Currently, treatment options for such diseases are limited 
and often ineffective against newly emerging viruses. Here, we demonstrate that 
Griffithsin (GRFT), a naturally derived lectin from red algae, inhibits the 
entry of multiple hemorrhagic fever viruses into host cells. By blocking key 
processes of the viral entry mediated by envelope glycoproteins, lectins such as 
GRFT can exhibit broad antiviral activity that could potentially overcome the 
limitations of existing treatments against emerging viruses. Our findings 
emphasize that targeting sugar chains and adjacent structures on viral 
glycoproteins with GRFT could provide a therapeutic strategy against diverse 
viral species. Such an approach is particularly valuable for newly emerging 
viruses for which specific countermeasures have not yet been established.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00372-26
PMID: 42037406