1. Vaccines (Basel). 2026 Mar 31;14(4):315. doi: 10.3390/vaccines14040315.

Comparison of Vaccine Platforms for Machupo Virus.

Erickson R(1), Muramatsu H(1), Tiwari S(1), Sriram S(1), Coirada FC(1), Pardi 
N(1), Bates P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Pathogenic mammarenaviruses cause severe hemorrhagic and 
neurologic disease in humans. Machupo virus (MACV), a New World (NW) 
mammarenavirus, causes Bolivian hemorrhagic fever in humans, and there are no 
approved vaccines.
METHODS: Here, we describe and compare the immunogenicity of three vaccines 
expressing the MACV glycoprotein complex (GPC) in C57BL/6 mice: a recombinant 
vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV) and two different lipid nanoparticle 
(LNP)-encapsulated nucleoside-modified mRNA (mRNA-LNP) vaccines. The first 
mRNA-LNP vaccine, designated MACV mRNA, expresses the full-length MACV GPC. The 
second mRNA-LNP vaccine, called MACV VLP mRNA, encodes MACV GPC with appended 
sequences that induce the budding of virus-like particles (VLPs) with MACV GPC 
on the surface. This is the first description of any mRNA-LNP vaccine for MACV 
and the first comparison of mRNA and rVSVs as vaccine candidates for MACV.
RESULTS: We find that two doses of either MACV mRNA or MACV VLP mRNA are 
required for the induction of robust humoral and cellular immune responses 
including total MACV GPC IgG, neutralizing antibodies, cross-reactive antibodies 
that bind the related Junín virus GPC, and MACV-specific T-cell responses. To 
further investigate vaccination strategies for MACV, we also evaluated a 
heterologous prime-boost regimen involving the MACV mRNA vaccine coupled with 
the rVSV-based MACV vaccine. We find that the highest levels of MACV 
GPC-specific IgG and neutralizing titers were achieved when heterologous mRNA 
and rVSV prime-boost regimens were employed.
CONCLUSIONS: These results elucidate differences in the immune response to 
different vaccine platforms for MACV and can inform future vaccine development 
for NW arenaviruses.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines14040315
PMCID: PMC13120303
PMID: 42042791

Conflict of interest statement: N.P. is named on patents describing the use of 
nucleoside-modified mRNA in lipid nanoparticles as a vaccine/therapeutic 
platform. He has disclosed those interests fully to the University of 
Pennsylvania, and he has in place an approved plan for managing any potential 
conflicts arising from the licensing of those patents. N.P. served on the mRNA 
strategic advisory board of Sanofi Pasteur in 2022, Pfizer in 2023–2024 and 
AldexChem in 2023–2025. N.P. is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of 
BioNet and has consulted for Vaccine Company Inc., Pasture Bio, and Piezo 
Therapeutics. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.