1. J Med Virol. 1983;12(2):93-102. doi: 10.1002/jmv.1890120203.

Protection of Lassa virus-infected guinea pigs with Lassa-immune plasma of 
guinea pig, primate, and human origin.

Jahrling PB.

Lassa virus-immune plasma has been used to treat human Lassa fever patients; 
however, criteria for plasma selection were based arbitrarily on available 
serologic tools and protective efficacy was never directly assessed. To test the 
validity of plasma therapy for Lassa virus infections in an animal model, and to 
develop biologically relevant criteria for selection of protective immune 
plasma, inbred, strain 13 guinea pigs were infected with a lethal dose of Lassa 
virus and treated with various Lassa-immune plasmas obtained from guinea pigs, 
primates, and convalescent human patients. Neutralizing antibody titers were 
determined in a virus dilution, plaque reduction test, and were expressed as a 
log10 plaque-forming units (PFU) neutralization index (LNI). All guinea pigs 
treated with immune plasma 6 ml/kg/treatment on days 0, 3, and 6 after virus 
inoculation were protected, provided the LNI exceeded 2.0. Plasmas obtained from 
donors in early convalescence (32-45 days) had low titers of N-antibody (LNI 
less than 2) and failed to confer protection, despite high titers of Lassa 
antibody measured in the indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test. Higher doses 
of marginally titered plasma conferred increased protection. The degree of 
protection and suppression of viremia was closely associated with LNI an not IFA 
titers. Administration of low-titered plasma did not result in immune 
enhancement. A high dose of human plasma from Liberia (12 ml/kg/treatment) was 
required to confer complete protection to guinea pigs infected with a Lassa 
virus strain from Sierra Leone (LNI = 1.6), while a lower dose (3 
ml/kg/treatment) was sufficient for protection against a Liberian strain (LNI = 
2.8), suggesting that a geographic matching of immune plasma and Lassa virus 
strain origin may increase treatment success. These studies support the concept 
of plasma therapy for Lassa infection and suggest that the plaque reduction 
neutralization test is more appropriate than the IFA test for predicting 
protective efficacy of passively administered plasma.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890120203
PMID: 6619814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]