1. Virology. 1997 Dec 22;239(2):389-401. doi: 10.1006/viro.1997.8878.

Replicon-helper systems from attenuated Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus: 
expression of heterologous genes in vitro and immunization against heterologous 
pathogens in vivo.

Pushko P(1), Parker M, Ludwig GV, Davis NL, Johnston RE, Smith JF.

Author information:
(1)Virology Division, U.S. Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious 
Diseases, Fort Detrick, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

A replicon vaccine vector system was developed from an attenuated strain of 
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEE). The replicon RNA consists of the 
cis-acting 5' and 3' ends of the VEE genome, the complete nonstructural protein 
gene region, and the subgenomic 26S promoter. The genes encoding the VEE 
structural proteins were replaced with the influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) or 
the Lassa virus nucleocapsid (N) gene, and upon transfection into eukaryotic 
cells by electroporation, these replicon RNAs directed the efficient, high-level 
synthesis of the HA or N proteins. For packaging of replicon RNAs into VEE 
replicon particles (VRP), the VEE capsid and glycoproteins were supplied in 
trans by expression from helper RNA(s) coelectroporated with the replicon. A 
number of different helper constructs, expressing the VEE structural proteins 
from a single or two separate helper RNAs, were derived from attenuated VEE 
strains Regeneration of infectious virus was not detected when replicons were 
packaged using a bipartite helper system encoding the VEE capsid protein and 
glycoproteins on two separate RNAs. Subcutaneous immunization of BALB/c mice 
with VRP expressing the influenza HA or Lassa virus N gene (HA-VRP or N-VRP, 
respectively) induced antibody responses to the expressed protein. After two 
inoculations of HA-VRP, complete protection against intranasal challenge with 
influenza was observed. Furthermore, sequential immunization of mice with two 
inoculations of N-VRP prior to two inoculations of HA-VRP induced an immune 
response to both HA and N equivalent to immunization with either VRP construct 
alone. Protection against influenza challenge was unaffected by previous N-VRP 
immunization. Therefore, the VEE replicon system was characterized by high-level 
expression of heterologous genes in cultured cells, little or no regeneration of 
plaque-forming virus particles, the capability for sequential immunization to 
multiple pathogens in the same host, and induction of protective immunity 
against a mucosal pathogen.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1997.8878
PMID: 9434729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]